This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


I 


60009Q202S 


I 


600089202S 


A  TREATISE 


THE  TRUE  DEVOTION 

TO 

THE   BLESSED  VIEGIN. 

BT  THE  YBNEBABLB  8BBYANT  OV  GOD, 

LOUIS-MARIE,  GRIGNON  DE  MONTFORT. 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  FRENCH 

By  FREDERICK  WILLIAM  PABER,  D.D. 

PBIBST  OF  THE  OBATOBT. 


LONDON: 
BURNS  AND  LAMBERT,  17, 18  PORTMAN  6TRBET, 

AND  63  PATEBNOSTEB  BOW. 
1863. 


LONDON: 

PRWTBD  BT  ROBSON,  LBYBT,  AND  P&ANKLTN, 

Oreat  New  Street  and  Fetter  Lane. 


CONTENTS. 


PAQB 

Translator's  Preface v 

Preface  TO  THE  French  Edition          ....     xiii 
Introduction 1 

PART  I. 
ON  DEVOTION  TO  OUR  BLESSED  LADT  IN  GENERAL. 
I.  Excellence  and  Necessity    of  Devotion   to  our 

Blessed  Lady 7 

n.  Discernment  of  the  True  Devotion  to  our  Blessed 

Lady ;  five  fundamental  truths  presupposed  37 

1.  False  Devotions  to  our  Lady  .        .      62 

2.  True  Devotion ;  its  Characters      .        .      70 

PART  n. 

ON  THE  MOST  EXCELLENT  DEVOTION  TO  OUR  BLESSED  LADT, 

OR  THE  PERFECT  CONSECRATION  TO  JESUS  BT  MART. 
Preliminary  Observations  on  the  different  ways  of 

honouring  our  Blessed  Lady      ....      77 
I.  In  what  consists  the  perfect  Consecration  to  Jesus 

by  Mary 82 

n.  Its  Motives 91 

Figure  of  this  Consecration  in  the  history  of  Ja- 
cob receiving  the  blessing  of  Isaac  through 
the  offices  of  Rebecca  .126 


IV  COl^ENTS. 

PAGB 

III.  Admirable  Effects  of  the  perfect  Consecration  to 

Jesus  by  Mary  . 149 

rV.  Its  Exterior  and  Interior  Practices      .  169 

Manner  of  practising  this  Devotion  at  Communion  185 

Formula  of  Consecration  to  Jesus  by  Mary .        .        .190 


PREFACE. 


It  was  in  the  year  1846  or  1847,  at  St.  Wilfrid's, 
that  I  first  studied  the  life  and  spirit  of  the 
Venerable  Grignon  de  Montfort ;  and  now,  after 
more  than  fifteen  years,  it  may  be  allowable  to 
say,  that  those  who  take  him  for  their  master 
will  hardly  be  able  to  name  a  saint  or  ascetical 
writer  to  whose  grace  and  spirit  their  mind  will 
be  more  subject  than  to  his.  We  may  not  yet 
call  him  Saint ;  but  the  process  of  his  beatifica- 
tion is  so  far  and  so  favourably  advanced,  that 
we  may  not  have  long  to  wait  before  he  will  be 
raised  upon  the  altars  of  the  Church. 

There  are  few  men  in  the  eighteenth  century 
who  have  more  strongly  upon  them  the  marks 

B 


VI  PREFACE. 

of  the  Man  of  Provideiice  than  this  Elias-like 
Missionary  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  Mary. 
His  entire  life  was  such  an  exhibition  of  the 
holy  folly  of  the  Cross,  that  his  biographers 
unite  in  always  classing  him  with  St  Simon 
Salo  and  St.  Philip  Neri.  Clement  XL  made 
him  a  missionary-apostolic  in  France,  in  order' 
that  he  might  spend  his  life  in  fighting  against 
Jansenism,  so  far  as  it  affected  the  salvation  of 
souls.  Since  the  apostolical  epistles  it  would  be 
hard  to  find  words  that  bum  so  marvellously  as 
the  twelve  pages  of  his  prayer  for  the  Missionaries 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  which  I  earnestly  refer  all 
those  who  find  it  hard  to  keep  up,  under  their 
numberless  trials,  the  first  fires  of  the  love  of 
souls.  He  was  at  once  persecuted  and  venerated 
every  where.  His  amount  of  work,  like  that  of 
St.  Antony  of  Padua,  is  incredible  and,  indeed, 
inexplicable.  He  wrote  some  spiritual  treatises, 
which  have  already  had  a  remarkable  influence 
on  the  Church  during  the  few  years  they 
have  been  known,  and  bid  fair  to  have  a  much 
wider  influence  in  years  to  come.  His  preaching, 
his  writing,  and  his  conversation  were  all  im- 


PEEFAOE.  VU 

pregnated  with  prophecy,  and  with  anticipations 
of  the  latter  ages  of  the  ChurcL  He  comes  for- 
ward, like  another  Si  Vincent  Ferrer,  as  if  on 
the  days  bordering  on  the  Last  Judgment,  and 
proclaims  that  he  brings  an  authentic  message 
from  God  about  the  greater  honour  and  wider 
knowledge  and  more  prominent  love  of  His 
Blessed  Mother,  and  her  connexion  with  the 
second  advent  of  her  Son.  He  founded  two  reli- 
gious congregations,— one  of  men,  and  one  of 
women, — ^which  have  been  quite  extraordinarily 
successfiil ;  and  yet  he  died  at  the  age  of  foriy- 
three,  in  1716,  after  only  sixteen  years  of  priest- 
hood. 

It  was  on  the  12th  of  May  1853,  that  the 
decree  was  pronounced  at  Eome,  declaring  his 
writings  to  be  exempt  from  all  error  which 
could  be  a  bar  to  his  canonisation.  In  this 
very  treatise  on  the  veritable  devotion  to  our 
Blessed  Lady,  he  has  recorded  this  pro- 
phecy. "  I  clearly  foresee  that  raging  brutes 
will  come  in  fury  to  tear  with  their  diabolical 
teeth  this  little  writing,  and  him  whom  the  Holy 
Ghost  has  made  use  of  to  write  it ;  or  at  least 


VUl  PBEFACE. 


to  envelop  it  in  the  silence  of  a  coffer,  in  order 
that  it  may  not  appear."  Nevertheless,  he  pro- 
phesies both  its  appearance  and  its  success.  All 
this  was  fulfilled  to  the  letter.  The  author  died 
in  1716,  and  the  treatise  was  found  by  accident 
by  one  of  the  priests  of  his  congregation  at  St. 
Laurent  -  sur  -  S^vre,  in  1842.  The  existing 
superior  was  able  to  attest  the  handwriting  as 
being  that  of  the  venerable  founder;  and  the 
autograph  was  sent  to  Eonie,  to  be  examined 
in  the  process  of  canonisation. 

All  those  who  are  likely  to  read  this  book 
love  God,  and  lament  that  they  do  not  love  Him 
more ;  all  desire  something  for  His  glory, — ^the 
spread  of  some  good  work,  the  success  of  some 
devotion,  the  coming  of  some  good  time.  One 
man  has  been  striving  for  years  to  overcome  a 
particular  fault,  and  has  not  succeeded.  An- 
other mourns,  and  almost  wonders  while  he 
mourns,  that  so  few  of  his  relations  and  friends 
have  been  converted  to  the  faitL  One  grieves 
that  he  has  not  devotion  enough ;  another  that 
he  has  a  cross  to  carry,  which  is  a  peculiarly- 
impossible  cross  to  him ;  while  a  third  has  do* 


PBEFAOB.  ix 

mestic  troubles  and  family  unliappinesses,  which 
feel  almost  incompatible  with  his  salvation ;  and 
for  all  these  things  prayer  appears  to  bring  so 
little  remedy.  But  what  is  the  remedy  that  is 
wanted  ?  what  is  the  remedy  indicated  by  God 
Himself?  If  we  may  rely  on  the  disclosures  of 
the  Saints,  it  is  an  immense  increase  of  devotion 
to  our  Blessed  Lady;  but,  remember,  nothing 
short  of  an  immense  one.  Here,  in  England, 
Mary  is  not  half  enough  preached.  Devotion 
to  her  is  low  and  thin  and  poor.  It  is  fright-- 
ened  out  of  its  wits  by  the  sneers  of  heresy. 
It  is  always  invoking  human  respect  and  carnal 
prudence,  wishing  to  make  Mary  so  little  of  a 
Mary  that  Protestants  may  feel  at  ease  about 
her.  Its  ignorance  of  theology  makes  it  un- 
substantial and  unworthy.  It  is  not  the  promi- 
nent characteristic  of  our  religion  which  it 
ought  to  be.  It  has  no  faith  in  itself.  Hence 
it  is  that  Jesus  is  not  loved,  that  heretics  are 
not  converted,  that  the  Church  is  not  exalted ; 
that  souls,  which  might  be  saints,  wither  and 
dwindle;  that  the  Sacraments  are  not  rightly 
frequented,  or  souls  enthusiastically  evangelised. 


X  PBEFACB. 

Jesus  is  obscured  because  Mary  is  k^t  in  the 
background.  Thousands  of  souls  perish  because 
Mary  is  withheld  from  them.  It  is  ihe  miserable 
imworthy  shadow  which  we  call  our  devotion 
to  the  Blessed  Virgin  that  is  the  cause  of  all 
these  wants  and  blights,  these  evils  and  omis- 
sions and  declines.  Yet,  if  we  are  to  believe 
the  revelations  of  the  Saints,  God  is  pressing  for 
a  greater,  a  wider,  a  stronger,  quite  another 
devotion  to  His  Blessed  Mother.  I  cannot  think 
of  a  higher  work  or  a  broader  vocation  for  any 
one  than  the  simple  spreading  of  this  peculiar 
devotion  of  the  Venerable  Grignon  de  Montfort. 
Let  a  man  but  try  it  for  himself,  and  his  sur- 
prise at  the  graces  it  brings  wiili  it,  and  the 
transformations  it  causes  in  his  soul,  will  soon 
convince  him  of  its  otherwise  almost  incredible 
efficacy  as  a  means  for  the  salvation  of  men, 
and  for  the  coming  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 
Oh,  if  Mary  were  fcut  known,  there  would  be  no 
coldness  to  Jesus  then  1  Oh,  if  Mary  were  but 
known,  how  much  more  wonderfiil  would  be  our 
faith,  and  how  different  would  our  Communions 
be !     Oh,  if  Mary  were  but  known,  how  much 


PBEFAOE.  XX 

happier,  how  much  holier,  how  much  less  worldly 
should  we  be,  and  how  much  more  should  we 
be  Uving  images  of  our  sole  Lord  and  Saviour, 
her  dearest  and  most  blessed  Son  I 

I  have  translated  the  whole  treatise  myself, 
and  have  taken  great  pains  with  it,  and  have 
been  scrupulously  faithftJ.  At  the  same  time, 
I  would  venture  to  warn  ihe  reader  that  one 
perusal  will  be  very  far  from  making  him  master 
of  it  If  I  may  dare  to  say  so,  there  is  a  grow- 
ing feeling  of  something  inspired  and  super- 
natural about  it,  as  we  go  on  studying  it ;  and 
with  that  we  cannot  help  experiencing,  after 
repeated  readings  of  it,  that  its  novelty  never 
seems  to  wear  off,  nor  its  ftdness  to  be  dimin- 
ished, nor  the  fresh  fragrance  and  sensible  fire 
of  its  unction  ever  to  abate.  May  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  Divine  Zealot  of  Jesus  and  Mary, 
deign  to  give  a  new  blessing  to  this  work  in 
England;  and  may  He  please  to  console  us 
quickly  with  the  canonisation  of  this  new  apostle 
and  fiery  missionary  of  His  most  dear  and  most 


XU  PREFACE. 

immaculate  Spouse;  and  still  more  with  the 
speedy  coming  of  that  great  age  of  the  Church, 
which  is  to  be  the  Age  of  Mary  1 

F.  W.  Faber, 
Priest  of  the  Oratory, 

,    Presentation  of  our  Blessed  Lady, 
1862. 


Note. 
See  Vie  de  Louis-Marie  Qrignon  de  Montfort  (Le 
Clerc,  Paris,  1839);  also  the  Jesuit  Father  Clorivi- 
ere's  life  of  him,  1785.  Grandet's  Life  of  him  (1724), 
as  well  as  Bastide's  memoirs  of  fifty  missions  given 
with  the  servant  of  God,  I  only  know  by  the  quota- 
tions in  the  Life  of  1839. 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FRENCH  EDITION. 


"  Gk)D  wishes  that  His  holy  Mother  should  now 
be  more  known,  more  loved,  more  honoured, 
than  ever  she  has  been ;  and  this  will  no  doubt 
come  to  pass,  if  the  predestinate  will  enter,  by 
the  grace  and  light  of  ihe  Holy  Ghost,  into  the 
interior  and  perfect  practice  which  I  will  dis- 
cover to  them."  These  words  of  the  venerable 
servant  of  God,  Louis  Marie  Grignon  de  Mont- 
fort,  cannot  fail  to  interest  our  piety,  and  to 
inspire  us  with  a  lively  desire  of  learning  from 
him  so  excellent  a  practice  of  honouring  the 
most  holy  Virgin. 

He  had  been  drawn  from  his  earliest  infancy, 
in  quite  a  particular  fashion,  to  the  love  of  this 
Queen  of  Angels ;  and  in  a  conversation  which 
he  had  with  his  intimate  friend  Monsieur  Blain, 
two  years  before  his  death,  the  pious  missionary 
confessed  to  him  that  Gtod  had  favoured  him 


ZIY  PREFACE  TO  THE  FBENCH  EDITION. 

wiih  an  extraordinaxy  grace,  which  was  the 
continued  presence  of  Jesus  and  Mary  in  the 
bottom  of  his  soul.  This  word  was  a  mystery 
to  Monsieur  Blain  ;  but  we  shall  see  the  expla- 
nation of  it  in  this  little  treatise.  We  shall  see 
revealed  to  us  there  the  heart  of  him  who  knew 
no  fairer  name  than  the  slave  of  Jesus  in  Mary. 
We  do  not,  however,  pretend  to  say  that  this 
explanation  will  be  equally  understood  by  all. 
We  must  remember  here  that  word  of  the  Eter- 
nal Wisdom,  "  Thou  hast  hidden  these  things 
from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  revealed  them 
to  the  little  ones."  It  has  been  said  in  the  Life 
of  the  venerable  servant  of  God,  that  his  history 
will  never  be  understood  except  by  a  Christian. 
It  has  this  in  common  wiih  the  lives  of  a  great 
number  of  the  servants  of  God.  We  may  say 
also  that  this  little  work  will  never  be  under- 
stood by  a  Christian  who  is  too  much  a  stranger 
to  the  maxims  of  humility  and  evangelical  sim- 
plicity, and  that  the  wise  of  this  world  will  find 
themselves  shocked  at  the  lessons  of  true  wisdom 
which  they  will  read  without  penetrating  their 
sense.    Animcdis  homo  nonperdpit  ea^  quce  surd 


PBEFAOE  TO  THE  FRENCH  EDITIOK.      Z¥ 

iSpiritus  DeL  Stultitia  enim  est  illiy  et  non  potest 
intelligere^  quia  spiritualiter  examinaiur.  The  man 
who  guides  himself  only  by  natural  light  does 
not  comprehend  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  Qt)d. 
They  seem  to  him  follies,  because  they  can  only 
be  judged  by  a  supernatural  light  which  he  has 
not  got  But  let  us  hasten  to  add,  that  sincere 
and  simple  souls  will  relish  the  manna  hidden  in 
the  pious  and  touching  instructions  of  the  virtu- 
ous priest  who  consumed  his  life  in  evangelising 
the  poor.  They  will  bless  Divine  Providence  for 
the  treasure.  They  will  feel  themselves  pene- 
trated with  love  for  Jesus  and  Mary,  in  reading 
these  burning  pages,  which  the  man  of  Qod 
wrote  in  the  fervour  of  his  prayer,  without  ever 
losing  sight  of  the  presence  of  our  Divine  Saviour 
and  His  holy  Mother.  ...  In  conclusion,  let  us 
say  a  few  words  on  the  discovery  of  this  treatise. 
At  the  time  of  the  French  revolution  in  1793, 
the  manuscripts  which  the  house  of  the  Mission- 
aries of  St.  Laurent-sur-S^vre  possessed  were 
hidden  in  the  neighbouring  farms,  where  they 
remained  buried  in  dust  for  many  years.  Later 
on,  those  which  were  found  were  put  into  the 


XYl      PBEFACE  TO  THE  FRENCH  EDITION. 

library  of  the  missionaries.  But  this  little  trea- 
tise was  not  at  that  time  recognised,  as  was  the 
case  with  some  others  also  composed  by  the 
venerable  founder  of  the  Company.  It  was 
not  till  1842  that  one  of  the  priests  of  the 
house  of  St  Laurent  found  it  by  chance  in  the 
library,  where  it  had  been  put  without  being 
recognised,  after  having  been  mixed  up  with  a 
great  number  of  imperfect  books.  "  After  I  had 
read  a  few  pages,"  says  the  priest,  "  I  took  it-, 
hoping  to  find  it  useful  for  making  a  sermon  on 
our  Lady.  I  read  by  chance  the  place  where  he 
speaks  of  his  Company  of  Mary.  I  recognised 
the  siyle  and  thoughts  of  our  venerable  founder, 
and  his  way  of  addressing  his  missionaries ;  and 
after  that,  I  had  no  doubt  the  manuscript  was 
his.  I  took  it  to  our  superior,  who  identified 
the  handwriting." 

[The  manuscript  has  been  examined  at  Rome; 
recognised  to  be  the  work  of  the  venerable  servant 
of  God ;  most  minutely  examined  in  its  doctrine ; 
and  declared  to  be  exempt  from  all  error  which  could 
be  a  bar  to  his  canonisation.] 


INTRODUCTION. 


It  is  by  the  most  holy  Virgin  Mary  that  Jesus 
has  come  into  the  world,  and  it  is  also  by  her 
that  He  has  to  reign  in  the  world. 

Mary  has  been  singularly  hidden  during  her 
life.  It  is  on  this  account  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
and  the  Church  call  her  alma  Mater^ — Mother 
secret  and  hidden.  Her  humiliiy  was  so  pro- 
found that  she  had  no  propensity  on  earth  more 
powerfiil  or  more  unintermitting  than  that  of 
hiding  herself,  even  from  herself,  as  well  as 
from  every  other  creature,  so  as  to  be  known  to 
Gk)d  only.  He  heard  her  prayers  to  Him,  when 
she  begged  to  be  hidden,  to  be  humbled,  and  to  be 
treated  as  in  all  respects  poor  and  of  no  accoimt 
He  took  pleasure  in  hiding  her  from  all  human 
creatures  in  her  conception,  in  her  birth,  in  her 
life,  and  in  her  resurrection  and  assumption. 
Her  parents  even  did  not  know  her,  and  the 
Angels  often  asked  of  each  other :  Quoe  est  ista? 
Who  is  that?  Because  the  Most  High  either  hid 


2  •  INTRODUCTION. 

her  from  them,  or  if  He  revealed  any  ihing  of 
her  to  them,  it  was  nothing  compared  to  what 
He  kept  undisclosed. 

Qt)d  the  Father  consented  that  she  should 
do  no  miracle,  at  least  no  public  one,  during 
her  life,  although  He  had  given  her  the  power. 
God  the  Son  consented  that  she  should  hardly 
ever  speak,  though  He  had  communicated  His 
wisdom  to  her.  Qt)d  the  Holy  Ghost,  though 
she  was  His  faithful  Spouse,  consented  that  His 
Apostles  and  Evangelists  should  speak  but  very 
little  of  her,  and  no  more  than  was  necessary  to 
make  Jesus  Christ  known. 

Mary  is  the  excellent  masterpiece  of  the 
Most  High,  of  which  He  has  reserved  to  Him- 
self both  the  knowledge  and  the  possession. 
Mary  is  the  admirable  Mother  of  the  Son,  who 
took  pleasure  in  humbling  and  concealing  her 
during  her  life,  in  order  to  &vour  her  humihty, 
calling  her  by  the  name  of  woman  (mulier)^  as  if 
she  was  a  stranger,  although  in  His  heart  He 
esteemed  and  loved  her  above  all  angels  and  all 
men.  Mary  is  the  sealed  fountain  and  the  faith- 
ful Spouse  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  whom  He  alone 
has  entrance.  Mary  is  the  sanctuary  and  the 
repose  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  where  God  dwells 
more  magnificently  and  more  divinely  than  in 
any  other  place  in  the  universe,  without  except- 
ing His  dwelling  between  the  Cherubim  and 
Seraphim.   Neither  is  it  allowed  to  any  creature, 


IKTBODUCTIOir.  8 

no  matter  how  pure,  to  enter  into  that  sanctuary 
without  a  great  and  special  privilege. 

I  say  with  the  Saints,  The  divine  Mary  is 
the  terrestrial  Paradise  of  the  New  Adam, 
where  He  is  incarnate  by  the  operation  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  in  order  to  work  there  incompre- 
hensible marvels.  She  is  the  grand  and  divine 
World  of  God,  where  there  are  beauties  and 
treasures  unspeakable.  She  is  the  magnificence 
of  the  Most  High,  where  He  has  hidden,  as  in 
her  bosom,  His  only  Son,  and  in  Him  all  that 
is  most  excellent  and  most  precious.  Oh,  what 
grand  and  hidden  things  that  mighty  God 
has  wrought  in  this  admirable  creature!  How 
has  she  herself  been  compelled  to  say  it,  in  spite 
of  her  profound  humiliiy :  Fecit  mihi  magnUy  qui 
potem  est!  The  world  knows  them  not,  because 
it  is  at  once  incapable  and  unworthy  of  such 
knowledge. 

The  Saints  have  said  admirable  things  of 
this  Holy  City  of  God ;  and,  as  they  themselves 
avow,  they  have  never  been  more  eloquent  and 
more  content  than  when  they  have  spoken  of 
her.  Yet,  after  all  they  have  said,  they  cry  out 
that  the  height  of  her  merits,  which  she  has 
raised  up  to  the  throne  of  the  Divinity,  camu)t 
be  fully  seen ;  that  the  breadth  of  her  chariiy, 
which  is  broader  than  the  earth,  is  in  truth  im- 
measurable ;  that  the  grandeur  of  her  power, 
which  she  exercises  even  over  God  Himself, 


4  INTRODUCTION. 

incomprehensible ;  and  finally,  that  the  depth  of 
her  humility,  and  of  all  her  virtues  and  graces, 
is  an  abyss  which  never  can  be  sounded. 

0  height  incomprehensible  I  0  breadth  un- 
speakable !  0  grandeur  immeasurable  I  0  abyss 
impenetrable !  Every  day,  from  one  end  of  the 
earth  to  the  other,  in  the  highest  heights  of  the 
heavens  and  in  the  profoundest  depths  of  the 
abysses,  every  thing  preaches,  every  thing  pub- 
lishes, the  admirable  Mary  I  The  nine  choirs  of 
Angels,  men  of  all  ages,  sexes,  conditions,  and 
religions,  good  or  bad,  nay  even  the  devils  them- 
selves, willingly  or  unwillingly,  are  compelled, 
by  the  force  of  truth,  to  call  her  Blessed. 

St.  Bonaventure  tells  us  that  all  the  Angels  in 
heaven  cry  out  incessantly  to  her,  Sancta^  sanctay 
sancta  Mariuy  Dei  Genitria  et  Virgo;  and  that 
they  oflFer  to  her  millions  and  millions  of  times 
a  day  the  Angelical  Salutation,  Ave  Maria;  pro- 
strating themselves  before  her,  and  begging  of 
her,  in  her  graciousness,  to  honour  them  with 
some  of  her  commands. 

St.  Michael,  as  St  Augustine  says,  although 
the  prince  of  all  the  heavenly  court,  is  the  most 
zealous  in  honouring  her  and  causing  her  to  be 
honoured,  while  he  waits  always  in  expectation 
that  he  may  have  the  honour  to  go,  at  her  bid- 
ding, to  render  service  to  some  one  of  her  serv- 
ants. 

The  whole  earth  is  fiill  of  her  glory,  es- 


INTBODUCnON.  O 

pecially  among  Christians,  amongst  whom  she 
is  taken  as  the  protectress  of  many  kingdoms, 
provinces,  dioceses,  and  cities.  Numbers  of  ca- 
thedrals are  consecrated  to  God  under  her  name. 
There  is  not  a  church  without  an  altar  in  her 
honour,  not  a  coimtry  or  a  canton  where  there 
are  not  some  miraculous  images,  where  all  sorts 
of  evils  are  cured,  and  all  sorts  of  good  gifts  ob- 
tained. Who  can  count  the  confraternities  and 
congregations  in  her  honour  ?  How  many  reli- 
gious orders  have  been  founded  in  her  name  and 
under  her  protection  I  What  numbers  there  are 
of  Brothers  and  Sisters  of  all  these  confraterni- 
ties, and  of  religious  men  and  women  of  all  these 
orders,  who  publish  her  praises  and  confess  her 
mercies !  There  is  not  a  little  child,  who,  as  it 
lisps  the  Ave  Maria,  does  not  praise  her.  There 
is  scarcely  a  sinner  who,  even  in  his  obduracy, 
has  not  some  spark  of  confidence  in  her.  Nay 
the  very  devils  in  hell  respect  her  while  they  fear 
her. 

After  that  we  must  surely  say  with  the  Saints, 
De  Maria  nunquam  satis;  we  have  not  yet  praised, 
exalted,  honoured,  loved,  and  served  Mary  as  we 
ought  to  do.  She  has  deserved  still  more  praise, 
still  more  respect,  still  more  love,  and  far  more 
service. 

Ailer  that  we  must  say  with  the  Holy  Ghost  j 
Omnis  gloria  Jilioe  Regis  ab  intusj — "  All  the  glory 
of  the  King's  daughter  is  within."    It  is  as  if 

C 


INTRODUCTION. 


all  the  outward  glory,  which  heaven  and  earth 
rival  each  other  in  laying  at  her  feet,  is  nothing 
in  comparison  with  that  which  she  receives  with- 
in £pom  the  Creator,  and  which  is  not  known  by 
creatures,  who  in  their  littleness  are  imable  to 
penetrate  the  secret  of  the  secrets  of  the  King. 

After  that  we  must  cry  out  with  the  Apos- 
tle, Nee  oculus  vidity  nee  auris  avdimt^  neo  in  cor 
hominis  ascendit^ — "  Eye  has  not  seen,  nor  ear 
heard,  nor  man's  heart  comprehended,"  the  beau- 
ties, the  grandeurs,  the  excellences,  of  Mary, — 
the  miracle  of  the  miracles  of  grace,  of  nature, 
and  of  glory. 

If  you  wish  to  comprehend  the  Mother,  says 
a  Saint,  comprehend  the  Son;  for  she  is  the 
worthy  Mother  of  God.  Hie  taceat  omnia  lingua^ 
— "  Here  let  every  tongue  be  mute." 

It  is  with  a  particular  joy  that  my  heart  has 
dictated  what  I  have  just  written,  in  order  to 
show  that  the  divine  Mary  has  been  up  to  this  time 
unknown,  and  that  this  is  one  of  the  reasons  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  not  known  as  He  ought  to  be. 
If,  then,  as  is  certain,  the  kingdom  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  to  come  into  the  world,  it  will  be  but 
a  necessary  consequence  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
kingdom  of  the  most  holy  Virgin  Mary,  who 
brought  Him  into  the  world  the  first  time,  and 
will  make  His  second  advent  full  of  splen- 
dour. 


TRUE  DEVOTION 


TO 


THE  BLESSED  VIRGIN. 


PART  I. 

ON  DEVOTION  TO  OUR  BLESSED  LADY  IN  GENERAL. 


I.   EXCELLENCE  AND  NECESSITY  OF  DEVOTION 
TO  OUR  BLESSED  LADY. 

I  AVOW,  with  all  the  Churcli,  that  Mary,  being 
but  a  mere  creature  that  has  come  from  the 
hands  of  the  Most  High,  is,  in  comparison  with 
His  Infinite  Majesty,  less  than  an  atom;  or 
rather  she  is  nothing  at  all,  because  He  only  is 
*^He  who  is,"  and  thus  by  consequence  that 
grand  Lord,  always  independent  and  sufficient  to 
Himself,  never  had,  and  has  not  now,  any  abso- 
lute need  of  the  Holy  Virgin  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  His  will  and  for  the  manifestation  of  His 
glory.     He  has  but  to  will,  in  order  to  do  every 


8  TBUE  DEVOTION  TO 

thing.  Nevertlieless  I  say  that,  things  being 
supposed  as  they  are  now,  Grod  having  willed  to 
commence  and  to  complete  His  greatest  works 
by  the  most  holy  Virgin,  since  He  created  her, 
we  may  well  think  He  will  not  change  His  con- 
duct in  the  eternal  ages;  for  He  is  God,  and 
He  changes  not  either  in  His  sentiments  or  in 
His  conduct. 

God  the  Father  has  not  given  His  Only-be- 
gotten to  the  world  except  by  Mary.  Whatever 
sighs  the  patriarchs  may  have  sent  forth, — ^what- 
ever prayers  the  prophets  and  the  saints  of  the 
ancient  law  may  have  offered  up  to  obtain  that 
treasure  for  fiill  four  thousand  years, — it  was  but 
Mary  that  merited  it ;  it  was  but  Mary  who  found 
grace  before  Otd  by  the  force  of  her  prayers  and 
the  eminence  of  her  virtues.  The  world  was  un- 
worthy, says  St  Augustine,  to  receive  the  Son 
of  God  immediately  from  the  Father's  hands. 
He  has  given  Him  to  Mary  in  order  that  the 
world  might  receive  Him  through  her.  The  Son 
of  God  has  made  Himself  Man ;  but  it  was  in 
Mary  and  by  Mary.  God  the  Holy  Ghost  has 
formed  Jesus  Christ  in  Mary ;  but  it  was  only 
after  having  asked  her  consent  by  one  of  the 
first  ministers  of  His  court 

God  the  Father  has  communicated  to  Mary 
His  fruitfulness,  as  far  as  a  mere  creature  was 
capable  of  it,  in  order  that  He  might  give  her 
the  power  to  produce  His  Son,  aud  all  the  mem- 


THE  BLESSED  YIBGIN.  9 

bers  of  His  mystical  Body.  God  the  Son  has 
descended  into  her  virginal  womb,  as  the  new 
Adam  into  the  terrestrial  paradise,  to  take  His 
pleasure  there,  and  to  work  in  secret  the  marvels 
of  His  grace. 

God  made  Man  has  found  His  liberiy  in  see- 
ing Himself  imprisoned  in  her  womb.  He  has 
made  His  Omnipotence  shine  forth  in  letting 
Himself  be  ctoried  by  that  blessed  Virgin.  He 
has  found  His  glory  and  His  Father's  in  hiding 
His  splendours  from  all  creatures  here  below,  and 
revealing  them  to  Mary  only.  He  has  glorified 
His  Independence  and  His  Majesty,  in  depend- 
ing on  that  sweet  Virgin,  in  His  Conception,  in 
His  Birth,  in  His  Presentation  in  the  Temple, 
in  His  Hidden  Life  of  thirty  years,  and  even  in 
His  Death,  where  she  was  to  be  present,  in  order 
that  He  might  make  with  her  but  one  same 
sacrifice,  and  be  immolated  to  the  Eternal  Fa- 
ther by  her  consent ;  just  as  Isaac  of  old  was 
ofiered  by  Abraham's  consent  to  the  Will  of 
Qod.  It  is  she  who  has  suckled  Him,  nourished 
Him,  supported  Him,  brought  Him  up,  and  then 
sacrificed  Him  for  us. 

0  admirable  and  incomprehensible  depend- 
ence of  a  God,  which  the  Holy  Ghost  could  not 
pass  in  silence  in  the  Gospel,  although  He  has 
hidden  from  us  nearly  all  the  admirable  things 
which  that  Incarnate  Wisdom  did  in  His  Hidden 
Life,  as  if  He  would  enable  us,  by  His  revelation 


10  TRUE  DEVOnOK  TO 

of  that  at  least,  to  understand  something  of  its 
price!  Jesus  Christ  gave  more  glory  to  God 
the  Father  by  submission  to  His  Mother  during 
those  thirty  years  than  He  would  have  given 
Him  in  converting  the  whole  world  by  the 
working  of  the  most  stupendous  miracles.  Oh, 
how  highly  we  glorify  God,  when,  to  please  Him, 
we  submit  ourselves  to  Mary,  after  the  example 
of  Jesus  Christ,  our  Sole  Exemplar ! 

If  we  examine  narrowly  the  rest  of  our 
Blessed  Lord's  Life,  we  shall  see  that  it  was  His 
Will  to  begin  His  miracles  by  Mary.  He  sancti- 
fied St.  John  in  the  womb  of  St.  Elizabeth  his 
mother ;  but  it  was  by  Mary's  word.  No  sooner 
had  she  spoken  than  John  was  sanctified ;  and 
this  was  His  first  and  greatest  miracle  of  grace. 
At  the  marriage  at  Cana  He  changed  the  water 
into  wine ;  but  it  was  at  Mary's  humble  prayer ; 
and  this  was  His  first  mirade  of  nature.  He 
has  begun  and  continued  His  miracles  by  Mary, 
and  He  will  continue  them  to  the  end  of  ages  by 
Mary  also. 

God  the  Holy  Ghost  being  barren  in  God — 
that  is  to  say,  not  producing  another  Divine 
Person — is  become  firuitful  by  Mary,  whom  He 
has  espoused.  It  is  with  her,  in  her,  and  of 
her,  that  He  has  produced  His  Masterpiece,  which 
is  a  God  made  Man,  and  whom  He  goes  on  pro- 
ducing in  the  persons  of  His  members  daily  to 
the  end  of  the  world.     The  predestinate  are  the 


THE  BLESSED  YIBGIK.  11 

members  of  that  Adorable  Head.  This  is  the 
reason  why  He,  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  more  He 
jQnds  Mary,  His  dear  and  indissoluble  Spouse^ 
in  any  soul,  becomes  the  more  active  and  mighiy 
in  producing  Jesus  Christ  in  that  soul,  and  that 
soul  in  Jesus  Christ. 

It  is  not  that  we  may  say  that  our  Blessed  Lady 
gives  the  Holy  Ghost  His  finiitfulness,  as  if  Ho 
had  it  not  Himself.  For  inasmuch  as  He  is  God, 
He  has  the  same  firuitfulness  or  capacity  of  pro- 
ducing as  the  Father  and  the  Son,  only  that  He 
does  not  bring  it  into  action,  as  He  does  not  pro- 
duce another  Divine  Person.  But  what  we  want 
to  say  is,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  chose  to  make  use 
of  our  Blessed  Lady,  though  He  had  no  absolute 
need  of  her,  to  bring  His  fruitfulness  into  ac- 
tion, by  producing  in  her  and  by  her  Jesus 
Christ  in  His  members ;  a  mystery  of  grace 
unknown  to  even  the  wisest  and  most  spiritual 
among  Christians. 

The  conduct  which  the  Three  Persons  of  the 
Most  Holy  Trinity  have  deigned  to  pursue  in 
the  Licamation  and  first  coming  of  Jesus  Christ, 
They  still  pursue  daily  in  an  invisible  manner 
throughout  the  whole  Church,  and  They  will 
still  pursue  it  even  to  the  consummation  of  ages 
in  the  last  coming  of  Jesus  Christ. 

God  the  Father  made  an  assemblage  of  all 
the  waters,  and  He  named  it  the  sea  (mare). 
He  has  made  an  assemblage  of  all  His  graces, 


12  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

and  He  has  called  it  Mary  (Maria).  This  great 
Grod  has  a  most  rich  treasury  in  which  He  has 
laid  up  all  that  He  has  of  beauty,  of  splendour, 
of  rarity,  and  of  preciousness,  even  to  His  own 
Son ;  and  this  immense  treasury  is  none  other 
than  Mary,  whom  the  Saints  have  named  the 
Treasure  of  the  Lord,  out  of  whose  plenitude  all 
men  are  made  rich. 

God  the  Son  has  communicated  to  His  Mo- 
ther all  that  He  has  acquired  by  His  Life  and 
by  His  Death,  His  infinite  merits  and  His  ad- 
mirable virtues;  and  He  has  made  her  the 
treasuress  of  all  that  His  Father  has  given  Him 
for  His  inheritance.  It  is  by  her  that  He  appUes 
His  merits  to  His  members,  and  that  He  com- 
municates His  virtues,  and  distributes  His  graces. 
She  is  His  mysterious  canal ;  she  is  His  aque- 
duct, through  which  He  makes  His  mercies  flow 
gently  and  abundantly. 

To  Mary,  His  faithftd  Spouse,  God  the  Holy 
Ghost  has  communicated  His  unspeakable  gifts; 
and  He  has  chosen  her  to  be  the  dispensatrix  of 
all  He  possesses,  in  such  sort  that  she  distributes 
to  whom  she  wills,  as  much  as  she  wills,  as  she 
wills,  and  when  she  wills,  all  His  gifts  and  graces. 
The  Holy  Ghost  gives  no  heavenly  gift  to  men 
which  He  does  not  pass  through  her  virginal 
hands.  Such  has  been  the  Will  of  God,  who 
has  willed  that  we  should  have  every  thing  in 
Mary ;  so  that  she  who  impoverished,  humbled, 


THE  BLESSED  VIBGIN.  13 

and  hid  herself  even  to  the  abyss  of  nothingness 
by  her  profound  humility  her  whole  Kfe  long, 
should  now  be  enriched,  and  exalted  by  the 
Most  High.  Such  are  the  sentiments  of  the 
Church  and  the  Holy  Fathers. 

If  I  were  speaking  to  the  free-thinkers  of 
these  times,  I  would  prove  what  I  have  said 
so  simply,  drawing  it  out  more  at  length,  and 
confirming  it  by  tiie  Holy  Scriptures  and  the 
Fathers,  quoting  the  original  passages,  and  ad- 
ducing various  solid  reasons,  which  maybe  seen 
at  length  in  the  book  of  Fr.  Poir^  {La  Triple 
Couronne  de  la  Sainte  Vierge),  But  as  I  speak 
particularly  to  the  poor  and  simple,  who  being 
of  good -will,  and  having  more  faith  than  the 
common  run  of  scholars,  believe  more  simply 
and  so  more  meritoriously,  I  content  myself 
with  putting  out  the  truth  quite  simply,  without 
stopping  to  quote  the  original  passages,  which 
they  would  not  understand.  Nevertheless,  with- 
out making  much  research,  I  shall  not  fail  from 
time  to  time  to  bring  forward  some  of  them.  But 
let  us  now  go  on  with  our  subject. 

Inasmuch  as  grace  perfects  nature,  and  glory 
perfects  grace,  it  is  certain  that  our  Lord  is 
still,  in  heaven,  as  much  the  Son  of  Mary  as  He 
was  on  earth ;  and  that,  consequently.  He  has 
preserved  the  most  perfect  obedience  and  sub- 
mission of  all  children  towards  the  best  of  all 
mothers.     But  we  must  take  great  pains  not  to 


14  TRUB  DEVOTION  TO 

conceive  of  this  dependence  as  any  abasement  or 
imperfection  in  Jesus  Christ.  For  Mary  is  infi- 
nitely below  her  Son,  who  is  God,  and  therefore 
she  does  not  command  Him,  as  a  mother  here 
below  would  command  her  child,  who  is  below 
her.  Mary,  being  altogether  transformed  into 
God  by  grace,  and  by  the  glory  which  trans- 
forms all  the  Saints  into  Him,  asks  nothing, 
wishes  nothing,  does  nothing  which  is  contrary 
to  the  Eternal  and  Immutable  Will  of  God. 
When  we  read,  then,  in  the  writings  of  SS.  Ber- 
nard, Bemardine,  Bonaventure,  and  others,  that 
in  heaven  and  on  earth  every  thing,  even  to 
God  Himself,  is  subject  to  the  Blessed  Virgin, 
they  mean  to  say  that  the  authority  which  God 
has  been  well  pleased  to  give  her  is  so  great,  that 
it  seems  as  if  she  has  the  same  power  as  Gt)d, 
and  that  her  prayers  and  petitions  are  so  power- 
ftd  with  God,  that  they  always  pass  for  com- 
mandments with  His  Majesty,  who  never  resists 
the  prayer  of  His  dear  Mother,  because  she  is 
always  humble  and  conformed  to  His  WilL 

If  Moses,  by  the  force  of  his  prayer,  arrested 
the  anger  of  God  against  the  Israelites,  in  a  man- 
ner so  powerfiil  that  the  Most  High  and  infi- 
nitely mercifiil  Lord,  being  unable  to  resist  him, 
told  him  to  let  Him  alone,  that  He  might  be 
angry  with  and  punish  that  rebellious  people, 
what  must  we  not  with  much  greater  reason 
think  of  the  prayer  of  the  humble  Mary,  that 


THE  BLESSED  YIBJGJN*  15 

worthy  Mother  of  God,  which  is  more  powerful 
with  His  Majesty  than  the  prayers  and  interces- 
sions of  all  the  Angels  and  Saints  both  in  heaven 
and  on  earth  ? 

Mary  commands  in  the  heavens  the  Angels 
and  the  Blessed.  As  a  recompense  for  her  pro- 
found humiliiy,  God  has  given  her  the  power 
and  permission  to  fill  with  Saints  the  empty 
thrones  fi'om  which  the  apostate  angels  fell  by 
pride.  Such  has  been  the  will  of  the  Most  High, 
who  exalts  the  humble,  that  heaven,  earth,  and 
hell  bend  with  good  will  or  bad  wiU  to  the 
commandments  of  the  hmnble  Mary,  whom  He 
has  made  sovereign  of  heaven  and  earth,  general 
of  His  armies,  treasurer  of  His  treasures,  dis- 
penser of  His  graces,  worker  of  His  greatest 
marvels,  restorer  of  the  human  race,  mediatrix 
of  men,  the  exterminator  of  the  enemies  of 
Qody  and  the  faithfiil  companion  of  His  gran- 
deurs and  His  triumphs. 

Qod  the  Father  wishes  to  have  children  by 
Mary  till  the  consununation  of  the  world ;  and  He 
has  said  to  her  these  words.  In  Jacob  inhaJntay — 
"  Dwell  in  Jacob," — ^that  is  to  say.  Make  jowc 
dwelling  and  residence  in  My  predestinated 
children,  figured  by  Jacob,  and  not  in  the 
reprobate  children  of  the  devil,  figured  by 
Esau. 

Just  as,  in  the  natural  and  corporal  genera- 
tion of  children,  there  is  a  father  and  a  mother, 


16  TRITE  DEVOTION  TO 

SO  in  the  supematural  and  spiritual  generation 
there  is  a  Father,  who  is  God,  and  a  Mother, 
who  is  Mary.  All  the  true  children  of  God, 
the  predestinate,  have  God  for  their  Father,  and 
Mary  for  their  Mother.  He  who  has  not  Mary 
for  his  Mother,  has  not  God  for  his  Father. 
This  is  the  reason  why  the  reprobate,  such  as 
heretics,  schismatics,  and  others,  who  hate  our 
Blessed  Lady,  or  regard  her  with  contempt 
and  indifference,  have  not  God  for  their  Father, 
however  much  they  boast  of  it,  simply  because 
they  have  not  Mary  for  their  Mother.  For 
if  they  had  her  for  their  Mother,  they  would 
love  and  honour  her  as  a  true  and  good  child 
naturally  loves  and  honours  the  mother  who  has 
given  him  life. 

The  most  infallible  and  indubitable  sign  by 
which  we  may  distinguish  a  heretic,  a  man  of 
bad  doctrine,  a  reprobate,  from  one  of  the  pre- 
destinate, is  that  the  heretic  and  the  reprobate 
have  nothing  but  contempt  and  indifference  for 
our  Blessed  Lady,  endeavoming  by  their  words 
and  examples  to  diminish  the  worship  and  love 
of  her  openly  or  hiddenly ,  and  sometimes  under 
specious  pretexts.  Alas  !  God  the  Father  has 
not  told  Mary  to  dwell  in  them,  for  they  are 
Esaus. 

God  the  Son  wishes  to  form  Himself,  and, 
so  to  speak,  to  incarnate  Himself,  every  day  by 
His  dear  Mother  in  His  members,  and  He  has 


THE  BLESSED  YIBGIN.  17 

said  to  her,  In  Israel  hoereditare^ — "  Take  Israel 
for  your  inheritance. "  It  is  as  if  He  had  said,  GJod 
the  Father  has  given  Me  for  an  inheritance  all 
the  nations  of  the  earth,  all  the  men  good  and 
bad,  predestinate  and  reprobate.  The  one  I  will 
lead  with  a  rod  of  gold,  and  the  others  with  a 
rod  of  iron.  Of  one  I  will  be  the  Father  and 
the  Advocate,  the  Just  Punisher  of  others,  and 
the  Judge  of  all.  But  as  for  you,  My  dear 
Mother, — you  shall  have  for  your  heritage 
and  possession  only  the  predestinate,  figured  by 
Israel;  and,  as  their  good  Mother,  you  shall 
bring  them  forth  and  maintain  them;  and,  as 
their  sovereign,  you  shall  conduct  them,  govern 
and  defend  them. 

"  This  man  and  that  man  is  bom  in  her,'* 
says  the  Holy  Ghost, — Homo  et  homo  ruxtus  est  in 
ea  (Ps.  Ixxxvi.  5).  According  to  the  explanation 
of  some  of  the  Fathers,  the  first  man  that  is 
bom  in  Mary  is  the  Man-God,  Jesus  Christ; 
the  second  is  a  mere  man,  the  child  of  Gt)d  and 
Mary  by  adoption.  If  Jesus  Christ  the  Head 
of  men  is  bom  in  her,  tibe  predestinate  who  are 
the  members  of  that  Head  ought  also  to  be  bom 
in  her  by  a  necessary  consequence.  One  and 
the  same  mother  does  not  bring  forth  into  the 
world  the  head  without  the  members,  nor  the 
members  without  the  head ;  for  this  would  be  a 
monster  of  nature.  So  in  like  manner,  in  the 
order  of  grace,  the  Head  and  the  members  are 


1 8  TEUE  DEVOTION  TO 

bom  of  one  and  the  same  Mother ;  and  if  a 
member  of  the  mystical  Body  of  Jesus  Christ— 
that  is  to  say,  one  of  the  predestinate — ^was  bom* 
of  any  other  mother  than  Mary,  who  has  pro- 
duced the  Head,  he  would  not  be  one  of  the 
predestinate,  nor  a  member  of  Jesus  Christ,  but 
simply  a  monster  in  the  order  of  grace. 

Besides  this,  Jesus  being  at  present  as  much 
as  ever  the  Fruit  of  Mary, — as  heaven  and  earth 
repeat  thousands  and  thousands  of  times  a  day, 
"  and  Blessed  be  the  Fruit  of  thy  womb,  Jesus," 
— it  is  certain  that  Jesus  Christ  is,  for  each  man 
in  particular  who  possesses  Him,  as  truly  the 
fruit  of  the  work  of  Mary,  as  He  is  for  the  whole 
world  in  general ;  so  that  if  any  one  of  the  &ith- 
fiil  has  Jesus  Christ  formed  in  his  heart,  he  can 
say  boldly.  All  thanks  be  to  Mary  I  what  I  pos- 
sess is  her  effect  and  her  fruit,  and  without  her 
I  should  never  have  had  it.  We  can  apply  to 
her  more  truly  than  St.  Paul  applied  to  himself 
those  words,  Quos  iterum  parturio  donee  formetur 
Christus  in  vobis^ — "  I  am  in  labour  again  with 
aU  tibe  children  of  God,  until  Jesus  Christ  my 
Son  be  formed  in  them  in  the  ftdness  of  His 
age."  St.  Augustine,  surpassing  himself,  and 
going  beyond  all  I  have  yet  said,  affirms  that 
all  the  predestinate,  in  order  to  be  conformed  to 
the  image  of  the  Son  of  God,  are  in  this  world 
hidden  in  the  womb  of  the  most  holy  Virgin; 
where  they  are  guarded,  nourished,  brought  up, 


THE  BLESSED  YIBGIN.  19 

and  made  to  grow  by  that  good  Mother  untfl 
she  has  brought  them  forth  to  glory  after  death, 
which  is  properly  the  day  of  their  birth,  as  the 
Church  calls  the  death  of  the  just  0  mystery  of 
grace,  unknown  to  the  reprobate,  and  but  little 
known  even  to  the  predestinate  1 

God  the  Holy  Ghost  wishes  to  form  Himself 
in  her,  and  to  form  elect  for  Himself  by  her, 
and  He  has  said  to  her,  In  electis  meia  mitte 
radices.  Strike  the  roots,  My  Well-beloved  and 
My  Spouse,  of  all  your  virtues  in  My  elect,  in 
order  that  they  may  grow  from  virtue  to  virtue, 
and  from  grace  to  grace.  I  took  so  much  com- 
placence in  you,  when  you  lived  on  earth  in  the 
practice  of  the  most  sublime  virtues,  that  I  de- 
sire still  to  find  you  on  earth,  without  your 
ceasing  to  be  in  heaven.  For  this  end,  repro- 
duce yourself  in  My  elect,  that  I  may  behold  in 
ihem  with  complacence  the  roots  of  your  invin- 
cible faith,  of  your  profound  humility,  of  your 
xmiversal  mortification,  of  your  sublime  prayer, 
of  your  ardent  charity,  of  your  firm  hope,  and 
all  your  virtues.  You  are  always  My  Spouse,  as 
fiuthfrd,  as  pure,  and  as  finiitfrd  as  ever.  Let 
your  faith  give  Me  My  faithftd,  your  purity 
My  virgins,  and  your  fertility  My  temples  and 
My  elect. 

When  Mary  has  struck  her  roots  in  a  soul, 
she  produces  there  marvels  of  grace,  which  she 
alone  can  produce,  because  she  alone  is  the  fruit- 


20  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

fill  Virgin,  who  never  has  had,  and  never  will 
have,  her  equal  in  purity  and  in  fruitfiilness. 

Mary  has  produced,  together  with  the  Holy 
Ghost,  the  greatest  thing  which  has  been,  or 
ever  will  be,  which  is  a  God-Man ;  and  she  will 
consequently  produce  the  greatest  things  that 
there  will  be  in  the  latter  times. 

The  formation  and  education  of  the  great 
Saints,  who  shall  come  at  the  end  of  the  world, 
are  reserved  for  her.  For  it  is  only  that  singu- 
lar and  miraculous  Virgin  who  can  produce,  in 
imion  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  singular  and  extra- 
ordinary things. 

When  the  Holy  Ghost,  her  Spouse,  has  found 
Mary  in  a  soul.  He  flies  there.  He  enters  there 
in  His  folness;  He  communicates  Himself  to 
that  soul  abundantly,  and  to  the  full  extent  to 
which  she  makes  room  for  her  Spouse.  Nay, 
one  of  the  great  reasons  why  the  Holy  Ghost 
does  not  now  do  startling  wonders  in  our  souls 
is  because  He  does  not  find  there  a  sufficiently 
great  imion  with  His  faithftd  and  indissoluble 
Spouse.  I  say  indissoluble  Spouse,  because  since 
that  Substantial  Love  of  the  Father  and  the  Son 
has  espoused  Mary,  in  order  to  produce  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Head  of  the  elect,  and  Jesus  Christ 
in  the  elect.  He  has  never  repudiated  her,  inas- 
much as  she  has  always  been  fruitfiil  and  faith- 
ftd. We  may  evidently  conclude,  then,  from 
what  I  have  said  (1),  That  Mary  has  received 


THE  BLESSED  VIRGIN.  21 

from  God  a  great  domination  over  the  souls  of 
the  elect ;  for  she  cannot  make  her  residence  in 
them,  as  God  the  Father  ordered  her  to  do,  and 
form  them  in  Jesus  Christ,  or  Jesus  Christ  in 
them,  and  strike  the  roots  of  her  virtues  in  their 
hearts,  and  be  the  indissoluble  companion  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  in  all  His  works  of  grace, — she  can- 
not, I  say,  do  all  these  things  unless  she  has  a 
right  and  domination  over  their  souls  by  a  singu- 
lar grace  of  the  Most  High,  who,  having  given 
her  power  over  His  only  and  Natural  Son,  has 
given  it  also  to  her  over  His  adopted  children, 
not  only  as  to  their  bodies,  which  would  be  but 
little  matter,  but  also  as  to  their  souls. 

Mary  is  the  Queen  of  heaven  and  earth  by 
grace,  as  Jesus  is  the  King  of  them  by  nature 
and  by  conquest.  Now,  as  the  kingdom  of  Jesus 
Christ  consists  principally  in  the  heart  and  in- 
terior of  a  man, — according  to  that  word,  "  The 
kingdom  of  God  is  within  you," — in  like  maimer 
the  kingdom  of  our  Blessed  Lady  is  principally 
in  the  interior  of  a  man,  that  is  to  say,  his  soul ; 
and  it  is  principally  in  souls  that  she  is  more 
glorified  with  her  Son  than  in  all  visible  crea- 
tures, and  that  we  can  call  her,  as  the  Saints  do, 
the  Queen  of  hearts. 

(2.)  We  must  conclude  that,  the  most  holy 
Virgin  being  necessary  to  God  by  a  necessity 
which  we  call  hypothetical,  in  consequence  of 
His  Will,  she  is  far  more  necessary  to  men,  in 

D 


J 


TEUE  DEVOTION  TO 


order  for  them  to  arrive  at  their  Last  End.  We 
must  not  confound  devotions  to  our  Blessed  Lady 
with  devotions  to  the  other  Saints,  as  if  devotion 
to  her  was  not  far  more  necessary  than  devotion 
to  them,  or  as  if  devotion  to  her  were  a,  matter 
of  supererogation. 

The  learned  and  pious  Suarez  the  Jesuit, 
the  erudite  and  devout  Justus  Lipsius  doctor  of 
Louvain,  and  many  others,  have  proved  invin- 
cibly, in  consequence  of  the  sentiments  of  the 
Faliiers  (and,  among  others,  of  St  Augustine, 
St.  Ephrem  deacon  of  Edessa,  St  Cyril  of  Je- 
rusalem, St.  Germanus  of  Constantinople,  St 
John  Damascene,  St.  Anselm,  St.  Bernard,  St 
Bemardine,  St.  Thomas,  and  St.  Bonaventure), 
that  devotion  to  our  Blessed  Lady  is  necessary 
to  salvation,  and  that,  even  in  the  opinion  of 
(Ecolampadius  and  some  other  heretics,  it  is  an 
infallible  mark  of  reprobation  to  have  no  esteem 
and  love  for  the  holy  Virgin ;  while  on  the  other 
hand  it  is  an  infallible  mark  of  predestination  to 
be  entirely  and  truly  devoted  to  her. 

The  figures  and  words  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments  prove  this.  The  sentiments  and 
examples  of  the  Saints  confirm  it.  Eeason  and 
experience  teach  and  demonstrate  it  Even  the 
devil  and  his  crew,  constrained  by  the  force  of 
truth,  have  often  been  obliged  to  avow  it  in 
their  own  despite. 

Among  all  the  passages  of  the  holy  Fathers 


THE  BLESSED  VIRGIN.  23 

and  doctors,  of  which  I  have  made  an  ample  col- 
lection, in  order  to  prove  this  truth,  I  shall,  for 
brevity's  sake,  quote  but  one :  Tibi  devotum  esse^ 
est  arma  qucedam  salutis  quoe  Deus  his  dat^  quos 
vide  salvos  fieri^ — "  To  be  devout  to  you,  0  holy 
Virgin,"  says  St.  John  Damascene,  "  is  an  arm 
of  salvation  which  God  gives  to  those  whom  He 
wishes  to  save."  I  could  bring  forward  here 
many  histories  which  prove  the  same  thing,  and, 
among  others,  one  which  is  related  in  the  chroni- 
cles of  St.  Dominic.  There  was  an  unhappy  he- 
retic near  Carcassonne,  where  St.  Dominic  was 
preaching  the  Rosary,  who  was  possessed  by  a 
legion  of  fifteen  thousand  devils.  These  evil 
spirits  were  compelled,  to  their  confusion,  by  the 
commandment  of  our  Blessed  Lady,  to  avow 
many  great  and  consoling  truths,  touching  devo- 
tion to  the  holy  Virgin ;  and  they  did  this  with 
so  much  force,  and  so  much  clearness,  that  it  is 
not  possible  to  read  this  authentic  history,  and 
the  panegyric  which  the  devil  made,  in  spite  of 
himself,  of  devotion  to  the  most  holy  Mary, 
without  shedding  tears  of  joy,  however  luke- 
warm we  may  be  in  our  devotion  to  her. 

If  devotion  to  the  most  holy  Virgin  Mary  is 
necessary  to  all  men,  simply  for  working  out 
their  salvation,  it  is  still  more  so  for  those  who 
are  called  to  any  particular  perfection ;  and  I  do 
not  think  any  one  can  acquire  an  intimate  union 
with  our  Lord,  and  a  perfect  fidelity  to  the  Holy 


24:  TBUE  DEVOTION  TO 

Ghost,  without  a  very  great  union  with  the  most 
holy  Virgin,  and  a  great  dependence  on  her 
succour. 

It  is  Mary  alone  who  has  found  grace  before 
God,  without  the  aid  of  any  other  mere  creature : 
it  is  only  by  her  that  all  those  who  have  found 
grace  before  God  have  found  it  at  all ;  and  it  is 
only  by  her  that  all  those  who  shall  come  aft^- 
wards  shall  find  it.  She  was  foil  of  grace  when 
she  was  saluted  by  the  Archangel  Gabriel,  and 
she  was  superabundantly  filled  with  grace  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  when  He  covered  her  with  His  im- 
speakable  Shadow ;  and  she  has  so  augmented, 
fix)m  day  to  day  and  firom  moment  to  moment, 
this  double  plenitude,  that  she  has  reached  a 
point  of  grace  immense  and  inconceivable ;  in 
such  sort  that  the  Most  High  has  made  her  the 
sole  treasurer  of  His  treasures,  and  the  sole  dis- 
penser of  His  graces,  to  ennoble,  to  exalt,  and 
to  enrich  whom  she  wishes ;  to  give  the  entry 
to  whom  she  wills  into  the  narrow  way  of  hea- 
ven ;  to  pass  whom  she  wills,  and  in  spite  of  all 
obstacles,  through  the  strait  gate  of  life ;  and 
to  give  the  throne,  the  sceptre,  and  the  crown 
of  iJie  King  to  whom  she  wills.  Jesus  is  every 
where  and  always  the  Fruit  and  the  Son  of 
Mary ;  and  Mary  is  every  where  the  veritable 
tree,  who  bears  the  Fruit  of  life,  and  the  true 
Mother,  who  produces  it. 

It  is  Mary  alone  to  whom  God  has  given 


THE  BLESSED  YIBOIN.  25 

the  keys  of  the  cellars  of  divine  love,  and  the 
power  to  enter  into  the  most  sublime  and  secret 
ways  of  perfection,  and  the  power  likewise  to 
make  others  enter  in  there  also.  It  is  Mary 
alone  who  has  given  to  the  miserable  children 
of  Eve,  the  feithless,  the  entry  into  the  terres- 
trial paradise,  that  they  may  walk  there  agree- 
ably with  Grod,  hide  themselves  there  securely 
against  their  enemies,  and  feed  themselves  there 
deliciously,  without  any  more  fear  of  death,  on 
the  fruit  of  the  trees  of  life  and  of  the  knowledge 
of  good  and  evil,  and  drink  in  long  draughts 
tiie  heavenly  waters  of  that  fair  fountain,  which 
gushes  forth  there  with  abundance ;  or  rather 
she  is  herself  that  terrestrial  paradise,  that  vir- 
gin and  blessed  earth,  from  which  Adam  and 
Eve,  the  sinners,  have  been  driven,  and  she 
gives  no  entry  there  except  to  those  whom  it  is 
her  pleasure  to  make  Saints. 

All  the  rich  among  the  people,  to  make  use 
of  an  expression  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  according 
to  the  explanation  of  St.  Bernard, — all  the  rich 
among  the  people  shall  supplicate  thy  face  from 
age  to  age,  and  particularly  at  the  end  of  the 
world ;  ihat  is  to  say,  the  greatest  Saints,  the 
souls  richest  in  graces  and  virtues,  shall  be  the 
most  assiduous  in  praying  to  our  Blessed  Lady, 
and  in  having  her  always  present  as  their  perfect 
model  to  imitate,  and  their  powerful  aid  to  give 
them  succour. 


2&  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

I  have  said  that  this  would  come  to  pass 
particularly  at  the  end  of  the  world,  and  indeed 
presently,  because  the  Most  High  with  His 
holy  Mother  has  to  form  for  Himself  great 
Saints,  who  shall  surpass  most  of  the  other 
Saints  in  sanctity,  as  much  as  the  cedars  of 
Lebanon  outgrow  the  little  shrubs,  as  has  been 
revealed  to  a  holy  soul,  whose  life  has  been 
written  by  a  great  servant  of  God. 

These  great  souls,  ftdl  of  grace  and  zeal, 
shall  be  chosen  to  match  themselves  against  the 
enemies  of  God,  who  shall  rage  on  all  sides ; 
and  they  shall  be  singularly  devout  to  our 
Blessed  Lady,  illuminated  by  her  light,  nourished 
by  her  milk,  led  by  her  spirit,  supported  by  her 
arm,  and  sheltered  under  her  protection,  so  that 
they  shall  fight  with  one  hand  and  build  with 
the  other.  With  one  hand  they  shall  fight, 
overthrow,  and  crush  the  heretics  with  their 
heresies,  the  schismatics  with  their  schisms,  the 
idolaters  with  their  idolatries,  and  the  sinners 
with  their  impieties.  With  the  other  hand  they 
shall  build  the  temple  of  the  true  Solomon, 
and  the  mystical  city  of  God ;  that  is  to  say, 
the  most  holy  Virgin,  called  by  the  holy  Fathers 
the  temple  of  Solomon  and  the  ciiy  of  God.  By 
their  words  and  their  examples  tiiey  shall  bend 
the  whole  world  to  true  devotion  to  Mary.  This 
shall  bring  upon  them  many  enemies ;  but  it  shall 
also  bring  many  victories  and  much  glory  for 


THE  BLESSED  YIBQIK.  27 

God  alone.  It  is  this  which  God  revealed  to  St 
Vincent  Ferrer,  the  great  apostle  of  his  age, 
as  he  has  sufficiently  noted  in  one  of  his  works. 

It  is  this  which  the  Holy  Ghost  seems  to 
have  prophesied  in  the  fifty-eighth  Psalm,  of 
which  these  are  the  words :  Et  sclent  quia 
Dominus  dominabitur  Jacob ,  etjinium  terrce  ;  con-- 
vertentur  ad  vesperamj  etfamem  patientur  tU  canesy 
et  circuibunt  dvitaterrij — "  And  they  shall  know 
that  God  will  rule  Jacob,  and  all  the  ends  of 
the  earth  ;  they  shall  return  at  evening,  and 
shall  sufier  hunger  like  dogs,  and  shall  go  round 
about  the  city." 

This  city  which  men  shall  find  at  the  end  of 
the  world  to  convert  themselves  in,  and  to  satisfy 
the  hunger  they  have  for  justice,  is  the  most  holy 
Virgin,  who  is  called  by  the  Holy  Ghost  the 
City  of  God. 

It  is  by  Mary  that  the  salvation  of  the  world 
has  begun,  and  it  is  by  Mary  that  it  must  be 
consummated.  Mary  has  hardly  appeared  at 
all  in  the  first  coming  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  order 
that  men,  as  yet  but  little  instructed  and  en- 
lightened on  the  Person  of  her  Son,  should  not 
remove  themselves  firom  Him,  in  attaching  them- 
selves too  strongly  and  too  grossly  to  her.  This 
would  have  apparently  taken  place,  if  she  had 
been  known,  because  of  the  admirable  charms 
which  the  Most  High  had  bestowed  even  upon 
her  exterior.     This  is  so  true  that  St.  Denys  the 


28  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

Areopagite  has  informed  us  in  his  writings  that 
when  he  saw  our  Blessed  Lady,  he  should  have 
taken  her  for  a  Divinity,  in  consequence  of  her 
secret  charms  and  incomparable  beauty,  had 
not  the  Faith  in  which  he  was  well  established 
taught  him  the  contrary.  But  in  the  second 
coming  of  Jesus  Christ,  Mary  has  to  be  made 
known  and  revealed  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  order 
that  by  her  Jesus  Christ  may  be  known,  loved, 
and  served.  The  reasons  which  moved  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  hide  His  Spouse  during  her  life,  and  to 
reveal  her  but  a  very  little  since  the  preaching 
of  the  Gt)8pel,  subsist  no  longer. 

Q^d,  then,  wishes  to  reveal  and  discover 
Mary,  the  masterpiece  of  His  hands,  in  these 
latter  times : 

1.  Because  she  hid  herself  in  this  world,  and 
put  herself  lower  than  the  dust  by  her  profound 
hmniUiy,  having  obtained  of  God  and  of  His 
Apostles  and  Evangelists  that  she  should  not 
be  made  manifest. 

2.  Because,  being  the  masterpiece  of  the 
hands  of  God,  as  well  here  below  by  grace  as 
in  heaven  by  glory.  He  wishes  to  be  glorified 
and  praised  in  her  by  those  who  are  living  upon 
the  earth. 

3.  As  she  is  the  aurora  which  precedes  and 
discovers  the  Sun  of  Justice,  who  is  Jesus  Christ, 
she  ought  to  be  recognised  and  perceived,  in 
order  that  Jesus  Christ  may  be  so. 


THE  BLESSED  VIRGIN.  29 

4.  Being  the  way  by  which  Jesus  Christ 
came  to  us  the  first  time,  she  will  also  be  the 
way  by  which  He  will  come  the  second  time, 
though  not  in  the  same  manner. 

5.  Being  the  sure  means  and  the  straight 
and  immaculate  way  to  go  to  Jesus  Christ,  and 
to  find  Him  perfectly,  it  is  by  her  that  the  holy 
souls,  who  are  to  shine  forth  especially  in  sanctity, 
have  to  find  our  Lord.  He  who  shall  find  Mary 
shall  find  life  ;  that  is,  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the 
Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life.  But  no  one  can 
find  Mary  who  does  not  seek  her ;  and  no  one 
can  seek  her,  who  does  not  know  her :  for  we 
cannot  seek  or  desire  an  unknown  object.  It 
is  necessary,  then,  for  the  greater  knowledge 
and  glory  of  the  Most  Holy  Triniiy ,  that  Mary 
should  be  more  known  than  ever. 

6.  Mary  must  shine  forth  more  than  ever 
in  mercy,  in  might,  and  in  grace,  in  these  latter 
times  :  in  mercy,  to  bring  back  and  lovingly 
receive  the  poor  strayed  sinners  who  shall  be  con- 
verted and  shall  return  to  the  Catholic  Church  ; 
in  might,  against  the  enemies  of  God,  idolaters^ 
schismatics,  Mahometans,  Jews,  and  souls  har- 
dened in  impiety,  who  shall  rise  in  terrible  re- 
volt against  God  to  seduce  all  those  who  shall 
be  contrary  to  them,  and  to  make  them  fall  by 
promises  and  threats;  and,  finally,  she  must 
shine  forth  in  grace,  in  order  to  animate  and 
sustain  the  valiant  soldiers  and  faithfiil  servants 


30  TBUE  DEVOTION  TO 

of  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  do  battle  for  His  in- 
terests. 

7.  And,  lastly,  Mary  must  be  terrible  to 
the  devil  and  his  crew,  as  an  army  ranged  in 
battle,  principally  in  these  latter  times,  because 
the  devil,  knowing  that  he  has  but  little  time, 
and  now  less  than  ever,  to  destroy  souls,  will 
every  day  redouble  his  efforts  and  his  combats. 
He  will  presently  raise  up  new  persecutions, 
and  will  put  terrible  snares  before  the  faithful 
servants  and  true  children  of  Mary,  whom  it 
gives  him  more  trouble  to  surmoimt  than  it  does 
to  conquer  others. 

It  is  principally  of  these  last  and  cruel  per- 
secutions of  the  devil,  which  shall  go  on  in- 
creasing daily  till  the  reign  of  Antichrist,  that 
we  ought  to  understand  that  first  and  celebrated 
prediction  and  curse  of  God,  pronounced  in  the 
terrestrial  Paradise  against  the  serpent  It  is  to 
our  purpose  to  explain  this  here,  for  the  glory  of 
the  most  holy  Virgin,  for  the  salvation  of  her 
children,  and  for  the  conftision  of  the  devil. 

Inimicitias  ponam  inter  te  et  mulierem^  et 
semen  tuum  et  semen  illius;  ipsa  conteret  caput 
tuumj  et  tu  insidiaberis  calcaneo  ejus  (Gen.  iii. 
15), — "  I  will  put  enmities  between  thee  and  the 
woman,  and  thy  seed  and  her  seed ;  she  shall 
crush  thy  head,  and  thou  shalt  lie  in  wait  for 
her  heel." 

Gt)d  has  never  made  or  formed  but  one  en- 


THE  BLESSED  YIBOIN.  31 

mity ;  but  it  is  an  irreconcilable  one,  which  shall 
endure  and  develop  even  to  the  end.  It  is  be- 
tween Mary,  His  worthy  Mother,  and  the  devil, 
— ^between  the  children  and  the  servants  of  the 
Blessed  Virgin  and  the  children  and  instruments 
of  Lucifer.  The  most  terrible  of  dl  the  enemies 
which  God  has  set  up  against  the  devil  is  His 
holy  Mother,  Mary.  He  has  inspired  her,  even 
since  the  days  of  the  earthly  Paradise,  though 
she  existed  then  only  in  His  idea,  with  so  much 
hatred  against  that  cursed  enemy  of  God,  with 
so  much  industry  in  unveiling  the  malice  of  that 
old  serpent,  with  so  much  power  to  conquer, 
to  overthrow,  and  to  crush  that  proud  impious 
rebel,  that  he  fears  her  not  only  more  than  all 
Angels  and  men,  but  ia  some  sense  more  than 
Grod  Himself.  It  is  not  that  the  anger,  the 
hatred,  and  the  power  of  God  are  not  infinitely 
greater  than  those  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  for  the 
perfections  of  Mary  are  limited,  but  it  is,  first, 
because  Satan,  being  proud,  suffers  infinitely 
more  firom  being  beaten  and  pimished  by  a 
little  and  hiunble  handmaid  of  God,  and  her 
humility  humbles  him  more  than  the  Divine 
power;  and,  secondly,  because  God  has  given 
Mary  such  a  great  power  against  the  devils, 
that,  as  they  have  often  been  obliged  to  confess, 
in  spite  of  themselves,  by  the  mouths  of  the 
possessed,  they  fear  one  of  her  sighs  for  a  soul 
more  than  the  prayers  of  all  the  Saints,  and  one 


32  TRXJE  DEVOTION  TO 

of  her  menaces  against  them  more  than  all 
other  torments. 

What  Lucifer  has  lost  by  pride,  Mary  has 
gained  by  humiUty.  What  Eve  has  damned  and 
lost  by  disobedience,  Mary  has  saved  by  obedi- 
ence. Eve,  in  obeying  the  serpent,  has  de- 
stroyed aU  her  children  together  with  herself, 
and  has  delivered  them  to  him ;  Mary,  being 
perfectly  faithM  to  God,  has  saved  all  her  chil- 
dren and  servants  together  with  herself,  and  has 
consecrated  them  to  His  Majesty. 

Gtod  has  not  only  set  an  enmity  but  enmities^ 
not  simply  between  Mary  and  the  devil,  but  be- 
tween the  race  of  the  holy  Virgin  and  the  race 
of  the  devil ;  that  is  to  say,  God  has  set  enmi- 
ties, antipathies,  and  secret  hatreds  between  the 
true  children  and  the  servants  of  Mary,  and  the 
children  and  servants  of  the  devil.  They  do  not 
love  each  other  mutually.  They  have  no  inward 
correspondence  with  each  other.  The  children 
of  Belial,  the  slaves  of  Satan,  the  friends  of  the 
world  (for  it  is  the  same  thing),  have  always  up 
to  this  time  persecuted  those  who  belong  to  our 
Blessed  Lady,  and  will  in  fiiture  persecute  them 
more  than  ever ;  just  as  of  old  Cain  persecuted 
his  brother  Abel,  and  Esau  his  brother  Jacob, 
who  are  the  figures  of  the  reprobate  and  the 
predestinate.  But  the  humble  Mary  will  always 
have  the  victory  over  that  proud  spirit,  and  so 
great  a  victory  that  she  will  go  the  length  of 


THE  BLESSED  VIRGIK. 


crushing  his  head,  where  his  pride  dwells.  She 
will  always  discover  the  malice  of  the  serpent 
She  will  always  counterwork  his  infernal  mines 
and  dissipate  his  diaboUcal  counsels,  and  will 
guarantee  even  to  the  end  of  time  her  faithful 
servants  fix)m  his  cruel  claw.  But  the  power  of 
Mary  over  all  the  devils  will  especially  break 
out  in  the  latter  times,  when  Satan  will  lay  his 
snares  against  her  heel ;  that  is  to  say,  her  hum- 
ble slaves  and  her  poor  children,  whom  she  will 
raise  up  to  make  war  against  him.  They  shall 
be  little  and  poor  in  the  world's  esteem,  and 
abased  before  all,  like  the  heel,  trodden  underfoot 
and  persecuted  as  the  heel  is  by  the  other  mem- 
bers of  the  body.  But  in  return  for  this,  they 
shall  be  rich  in  the  grace  of  God,  which  Mary 
shall  distribute  to  them  abundantly.  They  shall 
be  great  and  exalted  before  God  in  sanctity, 
superior  to  all  other  creatures  by  their  animated 
zeal,  and  leaning  so  strongly  on  the  divine  suc- 
cour, that,  with  the  humihty  of  their  heel,  in 
union  with  Mary,  they  shall  crush  the  head  of 
the  devil,  and  cause  Jesus  Christ  to  triumph. 

In  a  word,  God  wishes  that  His  holy  Mother 
should  be  at  present  more  known,  more  loved, 
more  honoured,  than  she  has  ever  been.  This  no 
doubt  will  take  place,  if  the  predestinate  enter, 
with  the  grace  and  light  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
into  the  interior  and  perfect  practice  which  I 
will  disclose  to  them  shortly.     Then  they  will 


34  TBITE  DEVOTION  TO 

see  clearly,  as  far  as  faith  allows,  that  beautiful 
Star  of  the  Sea.  They  will  arrive  happily  in  har- 
bour, following  its  guidance,  in  spite  of  the  tem- 
pests and  the  pirates.  They  will  know  the  gran- 
deurs of  that  Queen,  and  will  consecrate  them- 
selves entirely  to  her  service,  as  subjects  and 
slaves  of  love.  They  will  experience  her  sweet- 
nesses and  her  maternal  goodnesses,  and  they 
will  love  her  tenderly  like  well-beloved  children. 
They  will  know  the  mercies  of  which  she  is  full, 
and  the  need  they  have  of  her  succour;  and  they 
will  have  recourse  to  her  in  all  things,  as  to 
their  dear  advocate  and  mediatrix  with  Jesus 
Christ  They  will  know  what  is  the  most  sure, 
the  most  easy,  the  most  short,  and  the  most  per- 
fect means  by  which  to  go  to  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
they  will  deliver  themselves  to  Mary,  body  and 
soul,  without  reserve,  that  they  may  thus  be  all 
for  Jesus  Christ 

But  who  shall  be  those  servants,  slaves,  and 
children  of  Mary  ?  They  shall  be  a  burning  fire 
of  the  ministers  of  the  Lord,  who  shall  kindle 
the  fire  of  divine"  love  every  where,  and  sicut 
aagittce  in  manu  potentisy — like  sharp  arrows  in 
the  hand  of  the  powerfiil  Mary  to  pierce  her 
enemies.  They  shall  be  the  sons  of  Levi,  well 
purified  by  the  fire  of  great  tribulation,  and 
closely  adhering  to  God;  who  shall  carry  the 
gold  of  love  in  their  heart,  the  incense  of  prayer 
in  their  spirit,  and  the  myrrh  of  mortification  in 


THE  BLESSED  VIBOIK.  35 

their  body ;  and  they  shall  be  every  where  the 
good  odour  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  poor  and  to 
the  little,  while  they  shall  be  an  odour  of  death 
to  the  great,  to  the  rich,  and  to  the  proud  world- 
lings. 

They  shall  be  clouds  thundering  and  flying 
through  the  air  at  the  least  breath  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  who,  without  attaching  themselves  to  any 
thing,  without  being  astonished  at  any  thing, 
without  putting  themselves  in  pain  about  any 
thing,  shall  shower  forth  the  rain  of  the  Word 
of  Grod  and  of  life  eternal.  They  shall  thunder 
against  sin ;  they  shall  storm  against  the  world ; 
they  shall  strike  the  devil  and  his  crew;  and 
they  shall  strike  ftuiiher  and  further,  for  life  or 
for  death,  with  their  two-edged  sword  of  the 
Word  of  Gted,  all  those  to  whom  they  shall  be 
sent  on  the  part  of  the  Most  High. 

They  shall  be  the  true  apostles  of  the  latter 
times,  to  whom  the  Lord  of  Hosts  shall  give  the 
word  and  the  might  to  work  marvels,  and  to 
carry  off  the  glory  of  the  spoils  of  His  enemies. 
They  shall  sleep  without  gold  or  silver,  and, 
what  is  more,  without  care,  in  the  middle  of 
the  other  priests,  ecclesiastics,  and  clerks,  inter 
medios  cleros  ;  and  yet  they  shall  have  the  silvered 
wings  of  the  dove,  to  go,  with  the  pure  intention 
of  the  glory  of  Gted  and  the  salvation  of  souls, 
wheresoever  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  call  them. 
Neither  shall  they  leave  behind  them,  in  the 


36  TBUB  DBVOnON  TO 

places  where  they  have  preached,  any  thing  but 
the  gold  of  charity,  which  is  the  aocomplish- 
ment  of  the  whole  law.  In  a  word,  we  know 
that  they  shall  be  true  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ, 
who,  marching  in  the  footsteps  of  His  poverty, 
humility,  contempt  of  the  world,  and  chariiy, 
shall  teach  the  strait  way  of  Grod  in  the  pure 
truth,  according  to  the  holy  Gospel,  and  not 
according  to  the  maxims  of  the  world,  without 
putting  themselves  in  pain  about  things,  or  ac- 
cepting persons,  without  sparing,  fearing,  or 
listening  to  any  mortal,  however  influential  he 
may  be. 

They  shall  have  in  their  mouths  the  two- 
edged  sword  of  the  Word  of  God.  They  shall 
carry  on  their  shoulders  the  bloody  standard  of 
the  cross,  the  crucifix  in  their  right  hand  and 
the  rosary  in  their  left,  the  sacred  names  of  Je- 
sus and  Mary  on  their  hearts,  and  the  modesty 
and  mortification  of  Jesus  Christ  in  their  own 
behaviour.  These  are  the  great  men  who  shall 
come.  But  Mary  shall  be  there  by  the  order  of 
the  Most  High,  to  extend  His  empire  over  that 
of  the  impious,  the  idolaters,  and  the  Ma- 
hometans. But  when  and  how  shall  this  be  ? 
God  alone  knows.  It  is  for  us  to  hold  our 
tongues,  to  pray,  to  sigh,  and  to  wait, — easpec- 
tans  easpectavu 


THE  BLESSED  YIBGIN.  37 

n.    DISCERNMENT  OF  THE  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 
OUR  BLESSED  LADY. 

Having  said  something  so  far  of  the  necessity 
which  we  have  of  the  devotion  to  the  most  holy 
Virgin,  I  must  now  show  in  what  this  devotion 
consists.  This  I  will  do,  by  God's  help,  after  I 
shall  have  first  presupposed  some  fundamental 
truths,  which  shall  throw  light  on  that  grand 
and  solid  devotion  which  I  desire  to  disclose. 

First  Truth.     Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour,  true 
Qod  and  true  Man,  ought  to  be  the  last  end  of 
all  our  other  devotions,  else  they  are  false  and 
delusive.     Jesus  Christ  is  the  alpha  and  omega^ 
the  beginning  and  the  end  of  all  things.     We 
labour  not,  as  the  Apostle  says,  except  to  render 
every  man  perfect  in  Jesus  Christ ;  because  it  is 
in  Him  alone  that  the  whole  plenitude  of  the 
Diviniiy  dwells,   together  with  all   the  other 
plenitudes  of  graces,  virtues,  and  perfections ; 
because  it  is  in  Him  alone  that  we  have  been 
blessed  with  all  spiritual  benediction;  and  be- 
cause He  is  our  only  Master,  who  has  to  teach 
us ;  our  only  Lord,  on  whom  we  ought  to  de- 
pend ;  our  only  Head,  to  whom  we  must  belong ; 
our  only  Model,  to  whom  we  should  conform 
ourselves ;  our  only  Physician,  who  can  heal  us ; 
our  only  Shepherd,  who  can  feed  us ;  ovcc  only 
Way,  who  can  lead  us ;  our  only  Truth,  who  can 
I  us  grow ;  our  only  Life,  who  can  animate 

B 


38  TBUE  DEVOTION  TO 

US ;  and  our  only  All  in  all  things,  who  can  suf- 
fice us.  There  has  been  no  other  name  given 
under  heaven,  except  the  name  of  Jesus,  by 
which  we  can  be  saved.  God  has  laid  no  other 
foundation  of  our  salvation,  of  our  perfection, 
and  of  our  glory,  except  Jesus  Christ.  Every 
building  which  is  not  built  upon  that  firm  rock 
Is  founded  upon  the  moving  sand,  and  sooner  or 
later  will  fall  infallibly.  Every  one  of  the  feith- 
ftd  who  is  not  united  to  Him,  as  a  branch  to  the 
stock  of  the  vine,  shall  fall,  shall  wither,  and 
shall  be  fit  only  to  be  cast  into  the  fire.  If  we 
are  in  Jesus  Christ  and  Jesus  Christ  in  us,  we 
have  no  condemnation  to  fear.  Neither  the 
Angels  of  heaven,  nor  the  men  of  earth,  nor  the 
devils  of  hell,  nor  any  other  creatures,  can  in- 
jure us ;  because  they  cannot  separate  us  troia 
the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Jesus  Christ  By 
Jesus  Christ,  with  Jesus  Christ,  in  Jesus  Christ, 
we  can  do  aU  things ;  we  can  render  all  honour 
and  glory  to  the  Father  in  the  unity  of  the  Holy 
Ghost;  we  can  become  perfect  ourselves,  and 
be  to  our  neighbour  a  good  odour  of  eternal 
life. 

K,  then,  we  establish  the  solid  devotion  to 
our  Blessed  Lady,  it  is  only  to  establish  more 
perfectly  the  devotion  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  to 
put  forward  an  easy  and  secure  means  for 
finding  Jesus  Christ  K  devotion  to  our  Lady 
removed  us  &om  Jesus  Christ,  we  should  have 


THE  BLESSED  YIRGIK.  39 

to  reject  it  as  an  illusion  of  the  devil;  but  on 
the  contrary,  so  far  from  this  being  the  case, 
there  is  nothing  which  makes  devotion  to  our 
Lady  more  necessary  for  us,  as  I  have  already 
shown,  and  will  show  still  ftuiiher  hereafter, 
than  that  it  is  the  means  of  finding  Jesus  Christ 
perfectly,  of  loving  Him  tenderly,  and  of  serv- 
ing Him  faithftdly. 

I  here  turn  for  one  moment  to  Thee,  0  my 
sweet  Jesus,  to  complain  lovingly  to  Thy  Di- 
vine Majesiy  that  the  greater  part  of  Chris- 
tians, even  the  most  learned,  do  not  know  the 
necessary  union  which  there  is  between  Thee 
and  Thy  holy  Mother.  Thou,  Lord,  art  always 
with  Mary,  and  Mary  is  always  with  Thee,  and 
she  cannot  be  without  Thee,  else  she  would 
cease  to  be  what  she  is.  She  is  so  transformed 
into  Thee  by  grace  that  she  lives  no  more,  that 
she  is  as  tiiough  she  were  not.  It  is  Thou 
only,  my  Jesus,  who  livest  and  reignest  in  her 
more  perfectly  than  in  all  the  Angels  and  the 
Blessed.  Ah  I  if  we  knew  the  glory  and  the 
love  which  Thou  receivest  in  this  admirable 
creature,  we  should  have  very  different  thoughts 
both  of  Thee  and  her  from  what  we  have  now. 
She  is  so  intimately  united  with  Thee,  that  it 
were  easier  to  separate  the  light  from  the  sun, 
the  heat  from  the  fire.  I  say  more:  it  were 
easier  to  separate  from  Thee  all  the  Angels  and 
the  Saints  than  the  divine  Mary,  because  she 


40  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

loves  Thee  more  ardently,  and  glorifies  Thee 
more  perfectly,  than  all  other  creatures  put  to- 
gether. 

After  that,  my  svreet  Masterj  is  it  not  an 
astonishingly  pitiable  thing  to  see  the  ignorance 
and  the  darkness  of  all  men  here  below  in  re- 
gard to  Thy  holy  Mother?  I  speak  not  so 
much  of  idolaters  and  pagans,  who,  knowing 
Thee  not,  care  not  to  know  Thee ;  I  speak  not 
even  of  heretics  and  schismatics,  who  care  not 
to  be  devout  to  Thy  holy  Mother,  being  sepa- 
rated as  they  are  from  Thee  and  Thy  holy 
Church :  but  I  speak  of  Catholic  Christians, 
and  even  of  doctors  amongst  Catholics,  who 
make  profession  of  teaching  truths  to  others, 
and  yet  know  not  Thee  nor  Thy  holy  Mother, 
except  in  a  speculative,  dry,  barren,  and  indif-^ 
ferent  manner.  These  doctors  speak  but  rarely 
of  thy  holy  Mother,  and  of  the  devotion  which 
we  ought  to  have  to  her,  because  they  fear,  so 
they  say,  lest  we  should  abuse  it,  and  should  do 
some  injury  to  Thee  in  too  much  honouring 
Thy  holy  Mother.  If  they  see  or  hear  any  one 
devout  to  our  Blessed  Lady,  speaking  often  of 
his  devotion  to  that  good  Mother  in  a  tender, 
strong,  and  persuasive  way,  as  of  a  secure 
means  without  delusion,  as  of  a  short  road 
without  danger,  as  of  an  immaculate  way  with-, 
out  imperfection,  and  as  of  a  wonderftd  secret 
for  finding  and  loving  Thee  perfectly,  they  cry 


THE  BLESSED  YIBOIN.  41 

out  against  him,  and  give  him  a  thousand  false 
reasons  by  way  of  proving  to  him  that  he  ought 
not  to  talk  so  much  of  our  Blessed  Lady,  that 
there  are  great  abuses  in  that  devotion,  and 
that  we  must  direct  our  energies  to  destroy 
these  abuses,  and  to  speak  of  Thee,  rather  than 
to  incline  the  people  to  devotion  to  our  Blessed 
Lady,  whom  they  already  love  sufficiently. 

We  hear  them  sometimes  speak  of  devotion 
to  Thy  holy  Mother,  not  for  the  purpose  of  estab- 
lishing it  and  persuading  men  to  it,  but  to  destroy 
the  abuses  which  are  made  of  it,  while  all  the 
time  these  teachers  are  without  piety  or  tender 
devotion  towards  Thyself,  simply  because  they 
have  none  for  Mary.  They  regard  the  Bosary, 
the  Scapular,  and  the  Chaplet  as  devotions 
proper  for  weak  and  ignorant  minds,  and  with- 
out which  men  can  save  themselves;  and  if 
there  falls  into  their  hands  any  poor  client  of 
our  Lady,  who  says  his  Rosary,  or  has  any 
other  practice  of  devotion  towards  her,  they 
soon  change  his  spirit  and  his  heart  Listead 
of  the  Rosary,  they  counsel  him  the  &evea 
Penitential  Psalms.  Listead  of  devotion  to 
the  holy  Virgin,  they  counsel  him  devotion  to 
Jesus  Christ. 

0  my  sweet  Jesus,  have  these  people  got 
Thy  spirit?  Do  they  please  Thee  in  acting 
thus  ?  Is  it  to  please  Thee,  to  spare  one  single 
effort  to  please  Thy  Mother  for  fear  of  thereby 


42  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

displeasing  Thee  ?  Does  devotion  to  Thy  holy 
Mother  hinder  devotion  to  Thyself?  Is  it  that 
she  attributes  to  herself  the  honour  which  we 
pay  her  ?  Is  it  that  she  makes  a  side  for  herself 
apart  ?  Is  it  that  she  is  an  alien,  who  has  no 
union  with  Thee  ?  Does  it  displease  Thee  that 
we  should  try  to  please  her?  Is  it  to  sepa- 
rate or  to  alienate  ourselves  from  Thy  love  to 
give  ourselves  to  her  and  to  love  her?  Yet, 
my  sweet  Master,  the  greater  part  of  the  learned 
could  not  shrink  more  from  devotion  to  Thy 
holy  Mother,  and  could  not  show  more  indif- 
ference to  it,  if  all  that  I  have  just  said  were 
true!  Keep  me.  Lord, — ^keep  ine  from  their 
sentiments  and  their  practices,  and  give  me 
some  share  in  the  sentiments  of  gratitude,  es- 
teem, respect,  and  love  which  Thou  hadst  in 
regard  to  Thy  holy  Mother,  in  order  that  I 
may  love  Thee  and  glorify  Thee  all  the  more 
by  imitating  and  following  Thee  more  closely. 

So,  as  if  up  to  this  point  I  had  still  said 
nothing  in  honour  of  Thy  holy  Mother,  give 
me  now  the  grace  to  praise  her  worthily,  Fa/c 
me  digne  tuam  Matrem  coUavdarey  in  spite  of  all 
her  enemies,  who  are  Thine  as  well ;  and  grant 
me  to  say  loudly  with  the  Saints,  Non  prcemmat 
aliquis  Deum  se  habere  propitivm^  qui  benedictam 
Matrem  offemam  habuerit, — "  Let  not  that  man 
presume  to  look  for  the  mercy  of  God  who 
offends  His  holy  Mother."     To  obtain  of  Thy 


THB  BLESSED  YIB6IN.  43 

mercy  a  true  devotion  to  Thy  holy  Mother,  and 
to  inspire  it  to  the  whole  earth,  make  me  to 
love  Thee  ardently ;  and  for  that  end  receive  the 
burning  prayer  which  I  make  to  Thee  with  St 
Augustine  and  thy  true  friends : 

"  Tu  es  Christus,  pater  mens  sanctus,  Deus 
mens  pius,  rex  mens  magnus,  pastor  mens  bonus, 
magister  mens  unus,  adjutor  mens  optimus,  di- 
lectus  mens  pulcherrimus,  panis  mens  vivus, 
sacerdos  meus  in  aetemum,  dux  mens  ad  pa- 
triam,  lux  mea  vera,  dulcedo  mea  sancta,  via 
mea  recta,  sapientia  mea  praeclara,  simplicitas 
mea  pura,  concordia  mea  pacifica,  custodia 
mea  tota,  portio  mea  bona,  salus  mea  sempi- 
tema. 

"  Christe  Jesu,  amabilis  Domine,  cur  amavi, 
quare  concupivi  in  omni  vitS,  me^  quidquam 
prsBter  te  Jesum  Deum  meum?  Ubi  eram 
quando  tecum  monte  non  eram  ?  Jam  ex  hoc 
nunc,  omnia  desideria  mea,  incalescite  et  effluite 
in  Dominum  Jesum;  currite,  satis hactenus  tar- 
d^tis ;  properate,  qu6  pergitis ;  qusBrite  quam 
quseritis.  Jesu,  qui  non  amat  te,  anathema  sit ; 
qui  te  non  amat,  amaritudinibus  repleatur. 

"  0  dulcis  Jesu,  te  amet,  in  te  delectetur,  te  ad- 
miretur  omnis  sensus  bonus  tuaB  conveniens  laudi ; 
Deus  cordis  mei  et  pars  mea,  Christe  Jesu,  defi- 
ciat  cor  meum  spiritu  sue,  et  vivas  tu  in  me,  et 
concalescat  spiritu  meo  vivus  carbo  amoris  tui, 
et  exorescat  in  ignem  perfectum,  ardeat  jugiter 


44  TBUE  DEVOTION  TO 

in  arS,  cordis  mei,  ferveat  in  mediiUis  meis, 
flagret  in  absconditis  animae  meae;  in  die  con- 
summationis  mess  consummatus  inveniar  apud 
te.     Amen." 

I  have  desired  to  put  in  Latin  this  admir- 
able prayer  of  Si  Augustine,  in  order  that 
those  who  understand  Latin  may  say  it  every 
day,  to  ask  for  the  love  of  Jesus,  which  we  seek 
by  the  divine  Mary. 

\_The  translator  thinks  it  well  to  give  the  prayer 
in  English^  and  rvithout  throwing  it  into  the  small 
print  of  a  note ;] 

Thou  art  Christ,  my  holy  Father,  my  ten- 
der Gk)d,  my  great  King,  my  good  Shepherd, 
my  one  Master,  my  best  Helper,  my  most 
Beautiful  and  my  Beloved,  my  living  Bread, 
my  Priest  for  ever,  my  Leader  to  my  coun- 
try, my  true  Light,  my  holy  Sweetness,  my 
straight  Way,  my  excellent  Wisdom,  my  pure 
Simplicity,  my  pacific  Harmony,  my  whole 
Guard,  my  good  Portion,  my  everlasting  Sal- 
vation. 

Christ  Jesus,  sweet  Lord,  why  have  I  ever 
loved,  why  in  my  whole  life  have  I  ever  de- 
sired, any  thing  except  Thee,  Jesus  my  God  ? 
Where  was  I,  when  I  was  not  in  Thy  mind 
with  Thee  ?  Now,  from  this  time  forth,  do  ye, 
all  my  desires,  grow  hot,  and  flow  out  upon 
the  Lord  Jesus;  run, — ^ye  have  been  tardy  so 
far ;  hasten  whither  ye  are  going ;  seek  whom 


THE  BLESSED  YIBGIN.  45 

ye  are  seeking.  0  Jesus,  may  he  who  loves 
Thee  not  be  anathema ;  may  he  who  loves  Thee 
not  be  filled  with  bitterness ! 

0  sweet  Jesus,  may  every  good  feeling  that 
is  fitted  for  Thy  praise  love  Thee,  delight  in 
Thee,  admire  Thee,  God  of  my  heart,  and  my 
Portion!  Christ  Jesus,  may  my  heart  faint 
away  in  spirit,  and  mayest  Thou  be  my  life 
within  me  I  May  the  live  coal  of  Thy  love 
grow  hot  within  my  spirit,  and  break  forth  into 
a  perfect  fire ;  may  it  bum  incessantly  on  Ae 
altar  of  my  heart ;  may  it  glow  in  my  inner- 
most being;  may  it  blaze  in  hidden  recesses 
of  my  soul ;  and  in  the  day  of  my  consumma- 
ticKQ  may  I  be  found  consummated  with  Thee  I 
Amen. 

Second  Truth.  We  must  conclude,  from  what 
Jesus  Christ  is  with  regard  to  us,  that  we  do 
not  belong  to  ourselves,  but,  as  the  Apostle 
says,  are  entirely  His,  as  His  members  and  His 
slaves,  whom  He  has  bought  at  an  infinitely 
dear  price, — the  price  of  all  His  Blood.  Before 
Baptism  we  belonged  to  the  devil,  as  his  slaves ; 
but  Baptism  has  made  us  true  slaves  of  Jesus 
Christ,  who  have  no  right  to  live,  to  work,  or  to 
die,  except  to  bring  forth  fimit  for  that  God- 
Man,  to  glorify  Him  in  our  bodies,  and  to  let 
Him  reign  in  our  souls,  because  we  are  His 
conquest.  His  acquired  people,  and  His  inherit- 
ance.    It  is  for  the  same  reason  that  the  Holy 


46  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

Ghost  compares  us,  1.  to  trees  planted  along  the 
waters  of  grace  in  the  field  of  the  Church,  who 
ought  to  bring  forth  their  fimit  in  their  seasons ; 
2.  to  the  branches  of  a  vine,  of  which  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  stock,  and  which  must  yield  good 
grapes;  3.  to  a  flock  of  which  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  shepherd,  and  which  is  to  multiply  and  give 
milk ;  4.  to  a  good  land,  of  which  God  is  the 
labourer,  in  which  the  seed  multipUes  itself,  and 
brings  forth  thirty-fold,  sixty-fold,  and  a  hun- 
dred-fold. Jesus  Christ  cursed  the  unfruitftd 
fig-tree,  and  gave  sentence  against  the  useless 
servant,  who  had  not  made  any  profit  on  his 
talent.  All  this  proves  to  us  that  Jesus  Christ 
wishes  to  receive  some  finiits  from  our  wretched 
selves,  namely,  our  good  works,  because  those 
good  works  belong  to  Him  alone :  Creati  in  ope- 
rSms  bonis  in  Christo  Jem^ — "  Created  in  good 
works  in  Christ  Jesus," — ^which  words  show  both 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  sole  principle,  and  ought 
to  be  the  sole  end  of  all  our  good  works,  and  also 
that  we  ought  to  serve  Him,  not  as  servants  on 
wages,  but  as  slaves  of  love.  I  will  explain 
myself: 

Here  on  earth  there  are  two  ways  of  belong- 
ing to  another,  and  of  depending  on  his  author- 
ity, namely,  simple  service  and  slavery, — ^what 
we  mean  by  a  servant,  and  what  we  mean  by  a 
slave. 

By  common  service  amongst  Christians  a 


THE  BLESSED  YIR6IK.  4? 

man  engages  himself  to  serve  another,  during  a 
certain  time,  at  a  certain  rate  of  wages  or  of 
recompense. 

By  slavery  a  man  is  entirely  dependent  on 
another  for  his  whole  life,  and  must  serve  his 
master  without  pretending  to  any  wages  or  re- 
ward, just  as  one  of  his  beasts,  over  which  he 
has  the  right  of  life  and  death. 

There  are  three  sorts  of  slavery :  a  slavery 
of  nature,  a  slavery  of  constraint,  and  a  slavery 
of  the  will.  All  creatures  are  slaves  of  God  in 
the  first  sense  :  Domini  est  terra  et  plenitudo  ejtiSy 
— "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  of 
it."  The  demons  and  the  damned  are  slaves  in 
the  second  sense;  the  just  and  the  Saints  in  the 
third.  The  slavery  of  the  will  is  the  most  glori- 
ous to  God,  who  looks  at  the  heart,  claims  the 
heart,  and  calls  Himself  the  God  of  the  heart ; 
that  is,  of  the  loving  will,  because  by  that  sla- 
very we  make  choice  of  God  and  His  service 
above  all  things,  even  when  nature  does  not 
oblige  us  to  it. 

There  is  an  entire  difference  between  a  ser- 
vant and  a  slave :  1.  A  servant  does  not  give 
all  he  is,  all  he  has,  and  all  he  can  acquire  by 
himself  or  by  another,  to  his  master ;  but  the 
slave  gives  himself  whole  and  entire  to  his  mas- 
ter, all  he  has  and  all  he  can  gain,  without  any 
exception.  2.  The  servant  exacts  wages  for  the 
services  which  he  performs  for  his  master ;  but 


48  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

the  slave  can  exact  nothing,  whatever  assiduity, 
whatever  industry,  whatever  energy,  he  may 
have  at  his  work.  3.  The  servant  can  leave  his 
master  when  he  pleases,  or  at  least  when  the 
time  of  his  service  shall  be  expired ;  but  the 
slave  has  no  right  to  quit  his  master  at  his  will. 
4.  The  master  of  the  servant  has  no  right  of 
life  and  death  over  him,  so  that  if  he  kill  him 
like  one  of  his  beasts  of  burden,  he  would  com- 
mit an  unjust  homicide ;  but  the  master  of  the 
slave  has  by  the  law  a  right  of  life  and  death 
over  .him,  so  that  he  may  sell  him  to  any  body 
he  likes,  or  kill  him,  as  if  he  stood  on  the  same 
level  as  one  of  his  horses.  5.  Lastly,  the  ser- 
vant is  only  for  a  time  in  his  master's  service ; 
the  slave  is  for  always. 

There  is  nothing  among  men  which  makes 
us  belong  to  another  more  than  slavery.  There 
is  nothing  among  Christians  which  makes  us 
more  absolutely  belong  to  Jesus  Christ  and  His 
holy  Mother  than  the  slavery  of  the  will,  ac- 
cording to  the  example  of  Jesus  Christ  Himself, 
who  took  on  Him  the  form  of  a  slave  for  love 
of  us, — Formam  servi  accipienSj — and  also  accord- 
to  the  example  of  the  holy  Virgin,  who  is  called 
the  servant  and  the  slave  of  the  Lord.  The 
Apostle  calls  himself,  as  by  a  title  of  honour, 
Servus  Christi^ — "  The  slave  of  Christ"  Chris- 
tians are  often  called  in  the  Holy  Scriptures 
Servi  Christij  "  Slaves  of  Christ," — ^whioh  word 


THE  BLBSS^)  YIB6IK.  49 

servfiSy  as  a  great  man  has  truly  remarked,  sig- 
nified in  old  times  nothing  but  a  slave,  because 
there  were  no  servants  then  like  those  of  the 
present  day.  Masters  were  served  only  either 
by  slaves  or  by  fi-eedmen.  It  is  this  which 
the  catechism  of  the  Holy  Council  of  Trent,  in 
order  to  leave  no  doubt  about  our  being  slaves 
of  Jesus  Christ,  expresses  by  an  unequivocal 
term,  in  calling  us  Mandpia  Christi^ — "  Slaves 
of  Jesus  Christ." 

Having  premised  this,  I  say  that  we  ought 
to  be  to  Jesus  Christ  and  to  serve  Him  not  only 
as  mercenary  servants,  but  as  loving  slaves, 
who,  by  an  effect  of  great  love,  give  themselves 
up  to  serve  Him  in  the  quality  of  slaves,  for 
the  simple  honour  of  belonging  to  Him.  Before 
Baptism  we  were  the  slaves  of  the  devil ;  Bap- 
tism has  made  us  the  slaves  of  Jesus  Christ : 
Christians  must  needs  be  either  the  slaves  of 
the  devil  or  the  slaves  of  Jesus  Christ. 

What  I  say  absolutely  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  say 
relatively  of  our  Blessed  Lady.  Jesus  Christ, 
having  chosen  her  for  the  inseparable  companion 
of  His  life,  of  His  death,  of  His  glory,  and  of 
Hia  power  in  heaven  and  upon  earth,  has  given 
her  by  grace,  relatively  to  His  Majesty,  all  the 
same  rights  and  privileges  which  He  possesses 
by  nature.  Quidquid  Deo  convenit  per  naiuramy 
MarioB  convenit  per  gratiamf—^^  All  that  is  fitting 
to  Gk)d  by  nature  is  fitting  to  Mary  by  grace," 


50  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

— say  the  Saints ;  so  that,  accordmg  to  them, 
Mary  and  Jesus  having  but  the  same  will  and 
the  same  power,  the  two  have  the  same  subjects, 
servants,  and  slaves. 

We  may,  therefore,  following  the  sentiments 
of  the  Saints  and  of  many  great  men,  call  our- 
selves, and  make  ourselves,  the  loving  slaves  of 
the  most  holy  Virgin,  in  order  to  be  by  that 
very  means  the  more  perfectly  the  slaves  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Our  Blessed  Lady  is  the  means 
our  Lord  made  use  of  to  come  to  us.  She  is 
also  the  means  which  we  must  make  use  of  to 
go  to  Him.  For  she  is  not  like  all  the  rest  of 
creatures,  who,  if  we  should  attach  ourselves  to 
them,  might  rather  draw  us  away  from  God 
than  draw  us  near  Him.  The  strongest  in- 
clination of  Mary  is  to  unite  us  to  Jesus  Christ 
her  Son ;  and  the  strongest  inclination  of  the 
Son  is,  that  we  should  come  to  Him  by  His 
holy  Mother.  It  is  to  honour  and  please  Him, 
just  as  it  would  be  to  do  honour  and  pleasure  to 
a  king,  to  become  more  perfectly  his  subject 
and  his  slave,  by  making  ourselves  the  slaves  of 
the  queen.  It  is  on  this  account  that  the  holy 
Fathers,  and  St.  Bonaventure  after  them,  said 
that  our  Lady  was  the  way  to  go  to  our  Lord : 
Via  veniendi  ad  Christum  est  appropinquare  ad 
iliam. 

Moreover,  if,  as  I  have  said,  the  holy  Virgin 
is  the  Queen  and  Sovereign  of  heaven  and  of 


THE  BLESSED  VIBGIK.  01 

earth,  then  is  it  not  true  what  has  been  said  by 
St.  Anselm,  St.  Bernard,  St.  Bemardine,  and 
St  Bonaventure, — has  she  not  as  many  subjects 
and  slaves  as  there  are  creatures  ?  Imperio  Dei 
omnia  subjiciuntur^  et  Virgo  ;  ecce  imperio  Virginia 
omnia  subjiduntury  et  Deus.  Is  it  not  reasonable 
that  amongst  so  many  slaves  of  constraint,  there 
should  be  some  of  love,  who  of  their  own  good  will, 
in  the  quality  of  slaves,  should  choose  Mary  for 
their  mistress?  What!  are  men  and  devils  to  have 
their  voluntary  slaves,  and  Mary  to  have  none  ? 
What  I  shall  a  king  hold  it  to  be  for  his  honour 
that  the  queen,  his  companion,  should  have  slaves 
over  whom  she  has  the  right  of  life  and  death, 
because  the  honour  and  power  of  the  one  is  the 
honour  and  power  of  the  other,  and  yet  are  we  to 
think  that  our  Lord,  who,  as  the  best  of  all  Sons, 
has  divided  His  entire  power  with  His  holy 
Mother,  shall  take  it  ill  that  she  too  has  her 
slaves  ?  Has  He  less  respect  and  love  for  His 
Mother  than  Ahasuerus  had  for  Esther,  or  than 
Solomon  for  Bathsebee  ?  Who  shall  dare  to  say 
so,  or  even  to  think  it  ? 

But  whither  is  my  pen  hurrying  me  ?  Why 
am  I  stopping  here  to  prove  a  thing  so  plain  ? 
If  we  do  not  wish  to  call  ourselves  slaves  of  the 
Blessed  Virgin,  what  matter?  Let  us  make 
ourselves  and  caU  ourselves  slaves  of  Jesus 
Christ;  for  that  is  to  be  the  slave  of  the  holy 
Virgin,  inasmuch  as  Jesus  is  the  finiit  and  tha 


52  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

glory  of  Mary ;  and  it  is  this  very  thing  which 
we  do,  by  the  devotion  of  which  we  are  here- 
after to  speak. 

Third  Truth.  Our  best  actions  are  ordina- 
rily stained  and  corrupted  by  the  ground  of  evil 
which  is  so  deeply  laid  up  in  us.  When  we  put 
dean  and  clear  water  into  a  vessel  which  has  a 
foul  and  evil  smell,  or  wine  into  a  cask  the  inside 
of  which  has  been  spoilt  by  another  wine  which 
has  been  in  it,  the  clear  water  and  the  good 
wine  are  spoilt,  and  readily  take  the  bad  odour. 
In  like  manner,  when  God  puis  into  the  vessd 
of  our  soul,  spoilt  by  original  and  actual  sin, 
His  graces  and  heavenly  dews,  or  the  delicious 
wine  of  His  love.  His  gifts  are  ordinarily  spoilt 
and  corrupted  by  the  bad  leaven  and  the  evil 
which  sin  has  left  within  us.  Our  actions,  even 
tte  most  sublime  and  virtuous,  feel  the  eflFects  of 
it.  It  is  therefore  of  great  importance  in  the 
acquiring  of  perfection,  which  it  must  be  re- 
membered is  only  acquired  by  union  with  Jesus 
Christ,  to  empty  ourselves  of  every  thing  which 
is  bad  within  us ;  otherwise  our  Lord,  who  is 
infinitely  pure  and  hates  infinitely  the  least  stain 
upon  our  souls,  will  cast  us  out  fi'om  His  pre- 
sence, and  will  not  imite  Himself  to  us. 

1.  To  empiy  ourselves  of  oiu'selves,  we  must, 
first,  thoroughly  recognise,  by  the  light  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  our  inward  corruption,  our  incapa- 
ni^  &s^  every  good  thing  useftd  for  salvation, 


THE  BLESSED  TIBOIir.  53 

our  weakness  in  all  things,  our  inconstancy  at 
all  times,  our  indignity  of  every  grace,  and  our 
iniquiiy  in  every  position.  The  sin  of  our  first 
fiither  has  spoilt  us  all,  soured  us,  puffed  us  up 
and  corrupted  us,  as  the  leaven  sours,  puffs,  and 
corrupts  the  paste  into  which  it  is  put.  The 
actual  sins  which  we  have  committed,  whether 
mortal  or  venial,  pardoned  though  they  may  be, 
have  nevertheless  increased  our  concupiscence, 
our  weakness,  our  inconstancy,  and  our  cor- 
ruption, and  have  left  evil  consequences  in  our 
souls.  Our  bodies  are  so  corrupted  that  they 
are  called  by  the  Holy  Ghost  bodies  of  sin,  con- 
ceived in  sin,  nourished  in  sin,  and  capable  of 
all  sin, — bodies  subject  to  thousands  of  maladies, 
which  go  on  corrupting  fi-om  day  to  day,  and 
which  engender  nothing  but  disease,  vermin, 
and  corruption. 

Our  soul,  united  to  our  body,  has  become  so 
camaly  that  it  is  called  flesh.  '*  All  fledh  having 
corrupted  its  way,"  we  have  nothing  for  our 
portion  but  pride  and  blindness  in  the  spirit^ 
hardness  in  the  hearty  weakness  and  inconstancy 
in  the  soul,  concupiscence,  revolted  passions, 
snd  sicknesses  in  the  body.  We  are  naturally 
prouder  than  peacocks,  more  grovelling  on  the 
earth  than  toads,  more  vile  than  unclean  ani- 
mals, more  envious  th^i  serpents,  more  glutton- 
ous than  hogs,  more  ftuious  than  tigers,  lazier 
than  tortoises,  weaker  than  reeds,  and  more  ca- 

F 


64:  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

pricious  than  weathercocks.  We  have  down 
in  our  own  selves  nothing  but  nothingness  and 
sin,  and  we  deserve  nothing  but  the  anger  of 
God,  and  the  everlasting  hell. 

After  this,  ought  we  to  be  astonished  if  our 
Lord  has  said,  that  whosoever  wishes  to  follow 
Him  must  renounce  himself  and  hate  his  own 
soul,  and  that  whosoever  shall  love  his  own  soul 
shall  lose  it,  and  whosoever  shall  hate  it  shall 
save  it  ?  He  who  is  infinite  Wisdom  does  not  give 
commandments  without  reason,  and  He  has 
only  commanded  us  to  hate  ourselves,  because 
we  so  richly  deserve  to  be  hated.  Nothing  is 
worthier  of  love  than  God,  and  nothing  is  wor- 
thier of  hatred  than  ourselves. 

2.  Secondly,  in  order  to  empiy  ourselves  of 
ourselves,  we  must  die  to  ourselves  daily.  That 
is  to  say,  we  must  renounce  the  operations  of 
the  powers  of  our  soul,  and  of  the  senses  of  our 
body.  We  must  see  as  if  we  saw  not,  under- 
stand as  if  we  understood  not,  and  make  use  of 
the  things  of  this  world  as  if  we  made  no  use 
of  them  at  all.  This  is  what  St.  Paul  calls  dying 
daily, — Quotidie  morior.  If  the  grain  of  com 
falling  on  the  earth  does  not  die,  it  remains 
earth,  and  brings  forth  no  good  jfruit.  Ifisi 
granum  frummti^  cadem  in  terrarrij  mcyrtuum 
fuerity  ipsum  solum  manet.  If  we  die  not  to 
ourselves,  and  if  our  holiest  devotions  do  not 
inchne  us  to  this  necessary  and  useM  death. 


THE  BLESSED  VIBGIK.  55 

we  shall  bring  forth  no  fruit  worth  any  thing, 
and  our  devotions  will  become  useless.  All  our 
justices  will  be  stained  by  self-love  and  our  own 
will ;  and  this  will  cause  God  to  hold  in  abomin- 
ation the  greatest  sacrifices  we  can  make,  and 
the  best  actions  we  can  do ;  so  that  at  our  death 
we  shall  find  our  hands  empty  of  virtues  and  of 
merifs,  and  we  shall  not  have  one  spark  of  pure 
love,  which  is  only  communicated  to  souls  dead 
to  themselves,  souls  whose  life  is  hidden  with 
Jesus  Christ  in  Grod. 

3.  We  must  choose,  therefore,  among  all  the 
devotions  to  the  Blessed  Virgin,  the  one  which 
draws  us  most  towards  this  death  to  ourselves, 
inasmuch  as  it  will  be  the  best  and  the  most 
sanctifying.  For  we  must  not  think  that  all  that 
shines  is  gold,  that  all  that  tastes  sweet  is  honey, 
or  aU  that  is  easy  to  do  and  is  done  by  the 
greatest  number  is  sanctifying.  As  there  are 
secrets  of  nature  to  do  in  a  short  time,  at  little 
cost  and  with  facility,  natural  operations,  so 
also  in  like  manner  there  are  secrets  in  the 
order  of  grace  to  do  in  a  short  time,  with  sweet- 
ness and  facihty,  supernatural  operations,  such 
as  emptying  ourselves  of  self,  filling  ourselves 
with  God,  and  becoming  perfect. 

The  practice  which  I  am  about  to  disclose  is 
one  of  these  secrets  of  grace,  unknown  by  the 
greater  number  of  Christians,  known  even  to 
few  of  the  devout,  and  practised  and  rehshed  by 


56  TBUB  DEVOTION  TO 

a  far  less  number  still.  But  in  order  to  begin 
to  disclose  this  practice,  let  us  consider  a  fourth 
truth,  which  is  a  consequence  of  the  third. 

Fourth  Truth  It  is  more  perfect,  because  it 
is  more  humble,  not  to  approach  God  of  our- 
selves, without  taking  a  mediator.  The  very 
foundation  of  our  nature,  as  I  have  just  shown, 
is  so  corrupted,  that  if  we  lean  on  our*  own 
works,  industries,  and  preparations,  in  order  to 
reach  God  and  to  please  Him,  it  is  certain  that 
our  justices  will  be  defiled,  or  be  of  little  weight 
before  God,  to  engage  Him  to  xmite  Himself  to 
us,  and  to  hear  us.  It  is  not  without  reason 
that  God  has  given  us  mediators  with  Hia 
Majesty.  He  has  seen  our  unworthiness  and 
incapacity.  He  has  had  pity  upon  us ;  and^  in 
order  to  give  us  access  to  His  mercies.  He  has 
provided  us  with  powerfiil  intercessors  with  His 
grandeur,  insomuch  that  to  neglect  these  mediae 
tors,  and  to  draw  near  to  His  holiness  directly, 
and  without  any  recommendation,  is  to  £ul  in 
humility.  It  is  to  fail  in  respect  towards  GJod, 
so  high  and  so  holy.  It  is  to  make  less  account 
of  that  King  of  kings  than  we  should  make  of 
a  king  or  prince  of  earth,  whom  we  sboidd  not 
willingly  approach  without  some  friend  to  speak 
for  us. 

Our  Lord  is  our  Advocate  and  Mediator  of 
redemption  with  God  the  Father.  It  is  by  Him 
that  we  ought  to  pray,  in  union  witibi  the  whcde 


THE  BLESSED  VIBGIK.  57 

Clrarch  tritunphant  and  militant.  It  is  by  Him 
that  we  have  access  to  the  Majesty  of  the  Father, 
before  whom  we  ought  never  to  appear  except 
leaning  on  the  merits,  and  indeed  clothed  with 
the  merits,  of  His  Son ;  just  as  the  young  Jacob 
eame  before  his  father  Isaac  in  the  skins  of  the 
kids  to  receive  his  benediction. 

But  have  we  not  need  of  a  mediator  with  the 
Mediator  Himself?  Is  our  purity  great  enough 
to  unite  us  directly  to  Him,  and  by  ourselves  ? 
Is  He  not  God,  in  all  things  equal  to  His  Father, 
aind  by  consequence  the  Holy  of  Holies,  as 
worthy  of  respect  as  His  Father?  If,  by  His 
infinite  charity,  He  has  made  Himself  our  bail 
and  our  Mediator  with  Grod  His  Father,  in 
order  to  appease  Him  and  to  pay  Him  what  we 
owed  Him,  are  we  on  that  account  to  have  less 
respect  and  less  fear  for  His  Majesty  and  His 
Sanctity? 

Let  us  say  boldly  with  St.  Bernard,  that  we 
have  need  of  a  mediator  with  the  Mediator  Him- 
self, and  that  it  is  the  divine  Mary  who  is  the 
most  capable  of  filling  that'  charitable  office.  It 
is  by  her  that  Jesus  Christ  came,  and  it  is  by 
her  <hat  we  must  go  to  Him.  If  we  fear  to  go 
directly  to  Jesus  Christ  our  Gk>d,  whether  be- 
cause of  His  infinite  greaiaiess,  or  because  of  our 
vileness,  or  because  of  our  sins,  let  us  boldly 
implore  the  aid  and  intercession  of  Mary  our 
Moibor.     She  is  good^  she  is  tender,  she  has 


58  TBUE  DEVOTION  TO 

nothing  in  her  austere  or  repulsive,  nothing  too 
sublime  and  too  brilliant.  In  seeing  her,  we  see 
our  pure  nature,  ^he  is  not  the  sun,  who,  by 
the  vivacity  of  his  rays,  blinds  us  because  of  our 
weakness;  but  she  is  fair  and  gentle  as  the 
moon,  which  receives  the  light  of  the  sun,  and 
tempers  it  to  render  it  more  suitable  to  our 
capacity.  She  is  so  charitable  that  she  repels 
none  of  those  who  ask  her  intercession,  no 
matter  how  great  sinners  they  have  been ;  for, 
as  the  Saints  say,  never  has  it  been  heard  since 
the  world  was  the  world,  that  any  one  has  con- 
fidently and  perseveringly  had  recourse  to  our 
Blessed  Lady,  and  yet  has  been  repelled. 

She  is  so  powerfiil  that  never  have  any  of 
her  petitions  been  refused.  She  has  t)utto  show 
herself  before  her  Son  to  pray  to  Him,  and 
straightway  He  grants  her  desires,  straightway 
He  receives  her  prayers.  He  is  always  lovingly 
vanquished  by  the  breasts,  the  yearnings,  and 
the  prayers  of  His  dearest  Mother.  All  this  is 
drawn  firom  St  Bernard  and  firom  St,  Bonaven- 
ture,  so  that,  according  to  them,  we  have  three 
steps  to  mount  to  go  to  Grod :  the  first,  which  is 
the  nearest  to  us,  and  the  most  suited  to  our 
capacity,  is  Mary ;  the  second  is  Jesus  Christ ;. 
and  the  third  is  Grod  the  Father.  To  go  to 
Jesus,  we  must  go  to  Mary ;  she  is  our  media- 
trix of  intercession.  To  go  to  Glod  the  Father^ 
we  must  go  to  Jesus ;  for  He  is  our  Mediator  of 


THE  BLESSED  YIROIK.  59 

redemption.  Now  it  is  by  the  devotion  which  I 
am  about  to  bring  forward,  that  this  order  is 
guarded  perfectly. 

Fifth  Truth  It  is  very  diflScult,  considering 
our  weakness  and  frailty,  to  preserve  in  our- 
selves the  graces  and  treasures  which  we  have 
received  from  Grod  : — 

1.  Because  we  have  this  treasure,  which  is 
worth  more  than  heaven  and  earth  put  together, 
in  frail  vessels, — Habenvus  thesaurum  latum  in 
vasia  JhCtUibus^ — ^in  a  corruptible  body,  and  in  a 
weak  and  inconstant  soul,  which  a  mere  nothing 
disturbs  and  dejects. 

2.  Because  the  devils,  who  are  skilful 
thieves,  wish  to  surprise  us  unawares,  and  to 
strip  us.  They  watch  day  and  night  for  the  fe- 
vourable  moment.  For  that  end  they  go  round 
about  us  incessantly  to  devour  us,  and  to  snatch 
from  us  in  one  moment,  by  a  sin,  all  that  we 
have  gained  of  graces  and  of  merits  for  many 
years.  Their  malice,  their  experience,  their 
stratagems,  and  their  number,  ought  to  make 
us  fear  immensely  this  misfortune,  especially 
when  we  see  how  many  persons,  ftdler  of  grace 
than  we  are,  richer  in  virtues,  better  founded  in 
experience,  and  far  higher  exalted  in  sanctity, 
have  been  surprised,  robbed,  and  unhappily  pil- 
laged. Ah  I  how  many  of  the  cedars  of  Leba- 
non, how  many  of  the  stars  of  the  firmament, 
have  we  not  seen  to  fall  miserably,  and  in  the 


60  TBUB  DEYOnON  TO 

twinkling  of  an  eye  to  lose  all  their  height  and 
all  their  brightness  I  Whence  comes  tiiat  aad 
and  curious  change  ?  It  has  not  been  for  want 
of  grace,  which  is  wanting  to  no  man ;  but  it 
has  been  want  of  humility.  They  thought 
themselves  stronger  and  more  suflScient  than 
they  were.  They  thought  themselves  capable 
of  guarding  their  own  treasures.  They  trusted 
in  themselves,  leaned  upon  themselves.  They 
thought  their  house  secio'e  enough,  and  their 
coffers  strong  enough,  to  keep  the  precious  trea- 
sure of  their  grace.  It  is  because  of  that 
scarcely  sensible  leaning  upon  themselves,  while 
all  the  while  it  seemed  to  them  that  they  were 
leaning  only  on  the  grace  of  God,  that  the  most 
just  Lord  has  permitted  them  to  be  robbed  by 
leaving  them  to  themselves.  Alas  I  if  they  had 
but  known  the  admirable  devotion  which  I  will 
unfold  presently,  they  would  have  confided  their 
treasure  to  a  Virgin,  powerful  and  feithful,  who 
would  have  kept  it  for  them  as  if  it  had  been 
her  own  possession ;  nay,  who  would  have  even 
taken  it  as  an  obligation  of  justice  on  herself 
to  preserve  it  for  them. 

3.  It  is  difficult  to  persevere  in  justice  be- 
cause of  the  strange  corruption  of  the  world. 
The  world  is  now  so  corrupt,  that  it  seems  to  be 
inevitable  that  religious  hearts  should  be  soiled^ 
if  not  by  its  mud,  at  least  by  its  dust.  So  that 
it  has  become  a  kind  of  miracle  fear  any  one  to 


THE  BLESSED  VIBOIK.  61 

remain  firm  in  the  midst  of  tUs  impetuous  tor- 
rent without  being  drawn  in  by  it,  in  the  midst 
of  that  stormy  sea  without  being  drowned  in  it 
or  stripped  by  the  pirates  and  the  corsairs,  in 
the  midst  of  that  pestilent  air  without  being 
infected  by  it.  It  is  the  Virgin,  alone  faithAil, 
in  whom  the  serpent  has  never  had  part,  who 
works  this  miracle  for  those  who  serve  her  in 
that  sweet  way  which  I  have  shortly  to  unfold. 

Having  assumed  these  Five  Truths,  we  must 
now  take  more  pains  than  ever  to  make  a  good 
choice  of  the  true  devotion  to  our  Blessed  Lady. 
There  are  at  this  time,  more  than  ever,  false  devo- 
tions to  our  Blessed  Lady,  which  it  is  easy  to  mis- 
take for  true  ones.  The  devil,  like  a  false  coiner 
and  a  subtle  and  experienced  sharper,  has  already 
deceived  and  destroyed  so  many  souls  by  a  felse 
devotion  to  the  Blessed  Virgin,  that  he  makes  a 
daily  use  of  his  diabolical  experience  to  plunge 
many  others  by  this  same  way  into  everlasting 
perdition ;  amusing  them,  lulling  them  to  sleep 
in  sin,  under  the  pretext  of  some  prayers  badly 
said,  or  of  some  outward  practices  which  he  in- 
spires. As  a  false  coiner  does  not  ordinarily 
counterfeit  any  thing  but  gold  and  silver,  or 
very  rarely  the  other  metals,  because  they  are 
not  worth  the  trouble,  so  the  evil  spirit  does 
not  for  the  most  part  counterfeit  the  other  de- 
votions, but  only  those  to  Jesus  and  Mary,  the 
devotion  to  Holy  Communion,  and  to  our  Blessed 


bTi  TBUB  DEVOTION  TO 

Lady,  because  they  are,  among  other  devotions, 
what  gold  and  silver  are  amongst  metals. 

It  is,  then,  very  important  first  of  all  to 
know  (1)  false  devotions  to  our  Blessed  Lady 
in  order  to  avoid  them ;  and  (2)  the  true  de- 
votion in  order  to  embrace  it.  Li  conclusion, 
among  so  many  practices  of  true  devotion  to 
our  Blessed  Lady,  I  will  explain  more  in  detail, 
in  the  second  part  of  this  treatise,  which  is  the 
most  perfect  one,  the  one  most  agreeable  to  our 
Lady,  the  most  glorious  to  Grod,  and  the  most 
sanctifyang  to  ourselves,  in  order  that  we  may 
attach  ourselves  to  it. 

1.   On  False  Devotions  to  our  Lady. 

I  find  seven  kinds  of  false  devotees  and 
false  devotions  to  our  Lady,  namely,  (1)  the 
critical  devotees ;  (2)  the  scrupulous  devotees ; 
(3)  the  external  devotees;  (4)  the  presumptuous 
devotees;  (5)  the  inconstant  devotees ;  (6)  the 
hypocritical  devotees ;  and  (7)  the  interested 
devotees. 

The  critical  devotees  are,  for  the  most  part, 
proud  scholars,  rash  and  self-sufficient  spirits, 
who  have  at  bottom  some  devotion  to  the  holy 
Virgin,  but  who  criticise  nearly  all  the  practices 
of  devotion  to  her,  which  the  simple  people  pay 
simply  and  holily  to  their  good  Mother,  because 
these  practices  do  not  fall  in  with  their  own 
humour  and  fancy.     They  call  in  doubt  all  the 


THE  BLESSED  YIBGIN.  63 

miraoles  and  histories  recorded  by  authors 
worthy  of  our  faith,  or  drawn  from  the  ehroni- 
des  of  religious  orders ;  narratives  which  testify 
to  us  the  mercies  and  the  power  of  the  most 
holy  Virgin.  They  cannot  see  without  xm- 
easiness  simple  and  humble  people  on  their 
knees  before  an  altar  or  an  image  of  our  Lady, 
sometimes  in  the  comer  of  a  street,  in  order  to 
pray  to  God  there ;  and  they  even  accuse  them 
of  idolatry,  as  if  they  adored  the  wood  or  the 
stone.  They  say  that,  for  their  part,  they  are 
not  fond  of  these  external  devotions,  and  that 
their  minds  are  not  so  weak  as  to  give  faith  to 
such  a  number  of  tales  and  little  histories  as  are 
in  circulation  about  our  Lady.  Or,  at  other 
times,  they  reply  that  the  narrators  have  spoken 
as  professional  orators,  with  exaggeration;  or 
they  put  a  bad  interpretation  upon  their  words. 
These  kind  of  false  devotees  and  of  proud  and 
worldly  people  are  greatly  to  be  feared.  They 
do  an  infinite  wrong  to  the  devotion  to  our 
Lady ;  and  they  are  but  too  successftil  in  alien- 
ating people  from  it,  under  the  pretext  of  de- 
stroying its  abuses. 

The  scrupulous  devotees  are  those  who  ftar 
to  dishonour  the  Son  by  honouring  the  Mother, 
to  abase  the  one  in  elevating  the  other.  They 
cannot  bear  that  we  should  attribute  to  our  Lady 
ihe  most  just  praises  which  the  holy  Fathers  have 
given  her.     It  is  all  they  can  do  to  endure  that 


64  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

tiiere  should  be  njore  people  before  the  altar  of 
the  Blessed  Virgin  than  before  the  Blessed  Sa- 
crament, as  if  the  one  was  contrary  to  the  other, 
as  if  those  who  prayed  to  our  Blessed  Lady  did 
not  pray  to  Jesus  Christ  by  her.  They  are  un- 
willing that  we  should  speak  so  often  of  our 
Lady,  and  address  ourselves  so  frequently  to  her. 
These  are  the  favourite  sentences  constantly  in 
their  mouths :  "  To  what  end  are  so  many  chap- 
lets,  so  many  confraternities,  and  so  many  ex- 
ternal devotions  to  the  Blessed  Virgin  ?  There 
is  much  of  ignorance  in  all  this.  It  makes  a 
mummery  of  our  religion.  Speak  to  us  of  those 
who  are  devout  to  Jesus  Christ"  (yet  they  often 
name  Him  without  uncovering :  I  say  this  by 
way  of  parenthesis).  "  We  must  have  recourse 
to  Jesus  Christ ;  He  is  our  only  Mediator.  We 
must  preach  Jesus  Christ ;  this  is  the  solid  de- 
votion." What  they  say  is  true  in  a  certain 
sense,  but  it  is  very  dangerous,  when,  by  the  ap- 
plication they  make  of  it,  they  hinder  devotion 
to  our  Blessed  Lady,  and  it  is,  under  the  pre- 
text of  a  greater  good,  a  subtle  snare  of  the  evil 
one.  For  never  do  we  honour  Jesus  Christ  more 
than  when  we  are  most  honouring  His  Blessed 
Mother.  Lideed  we  only  honour  Mary  that  we 
may  the  more  perfectly  honour  Jesus,  inasmuch 
as  we  only  go  to  her  as  to  the  way  in  which  we 
are  to  find  the  end  we  are  seeking,  which  is 
Jesus. 


THE  BLESSED  YXBGIN.  65 

The  Church,  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  blesses 
our  Lady  first,  and  our  Lord  second, — Benedicta 
ifu  m  mulierSmSy,  et  henedktus  fructua  verUris  tvi 
Jems.  It  is  not  that  Mary  is  more  than  Jesus, 
or  even  equal  to  Him,  That  would  be  an  into- 
lerable heresy ;  but  it  is  that,  in  order  to  bless 
Jesus  more  perfectly,  we  must  begin  by  blessing 
Mary,  Let  us,  then,  say  with  all  the  true  clients 
of  our  Lady  against  these  false  scnipulous  de- 
votees, 0  Mary,  thou  art  blessed  amongst  all 
women,  and  blessed  is  the  fruit  of  thy  womb, 
Jesus. 

External  devotees  are  persons  who  make  all 
devotion  to  our  Blessed  Lady  consist  in  outward 
practices.  They  have  no  taste  except  for  the 
exterior  of  this  devotion,  because  they  have  no 
interior  spirit  of  their  own.  They  will  say  quanti- 
ties of  Bosaries  with  the  greatest  precipitation ; 
they  will  hear  many  Masses  distractedly ;  they 
will  go  without  devotion  to  processions;  they 
win  enrol  themselves  in  all  sorts  of  confraterni- 
ties, without  amending  their  lives,  without  doing 
any  violence  to  their  passions,  or  without  imi- 
tating the  virtues  of  that  most  holy  Virgin. 
They  have  no  love  but  for  the  sensible  part 
of  devotion,  without  having  any  relish  for  its 
solidity.  If  they  have  not  sensible  sweetness  in 
their  practices,  they  think  they  are  doing  no- 
thing; they  get  all  out  of  joint,  throw  every 
thing  up,  or  do  every  thing  at  random.     The 


64  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

there  should  be  njore  people  before  the  altar  of 
the  Blessed  Virgin  than  before  the  Blessed  Sa- 
crament, as  if  the  one  was  contrary  to  the  other, 
as  if  those  who  prayed  to  our  Blessed  Lady  did 
not  pray  to  Jesus  Christ  by  her.  They  are  un- 
willing that  we  should  speak  so  often  of  our 
Lady,  and  address  ourselves  so  frequently  to  her. 
These  are  the  favourite  sentences  constantly  in 
their  mouths :  "  To  what  end  are  so  many  chap- 
lets,  so  many  confraternities,  and  so  many  ex- 
ternal devotions  to  the  Blessed  Virgin  ?  There 
is  much  of  ignorance  in  all  this.  It  makes  a 
mummery  of  our  religion.  Speak  to  us  of  those 
who  are  devout  to  Jesus  Christ"  (yet  they  often 
name  Him  without  uncovering :  I  say  this  by 
way  of  parenthesis),  "  We  must  have  recourse 
to  Jesus  Christ ;  He  is  our  only  Mediator.  We 
must  preach  Jesus  Christ ;  this  is  the  solid  de- 
votion." What  they  say  is  true  in  a  certain 
sense,  but  it  is  very  dangerous,  when,  by  the  ap- 
plication they  make  of  it,  they  hinder  devotion 
to  our  Blessed  Lady,  and  it  is,  under  the  pre- 
text of  a  greater  good,  a  subtle  snare  of  the  evil 
one.  For  never  do  we  honour  Jesus  Christ  more 
than  when  we  are  most  honouring  His  Blessed 
Mother.  Indeed  we  only  honour  Mary  that  we 
may  the  more  perfectly  honour  Jesus,  inasmuch 
lA&we  only  go  to  her  as  to  the  way  in  which  we 
%d  the  end  we  are  seeking,  which  is 


THE  BLESSED  YXBGIN.  65 

The  Church,  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  blesses 
our  Lady  first,  and  our  Lord  second, — Benedicta 
tu  in  mulierSmSy,  et  hemdictus  fructits  ventris  tui 
Jesus*  It  is  not  that  Mary  is  more  than  Jesus, 
or  even  equal  to  Bom,  That  would  be  an  into- 
lerable heresy ;  but  it  is  that,  in  order  to  bless 
Jesus  more  perfectly,  we  must  begin  by  blessing 
Mary.  Let  us,  then,  say  with  all  the  true  clients 
of  our  Lady  against  these  false  scrapulous  de- 
votees, 0  Mary,  thou  art  blessed  amongst  all 
women,  and  blessed  is  the  fruit  of  thy  womb, 
Jesus. 

External  devotees  are  persons  who  make  all 
devotion  to  our  Blessed  Lady  consist  in  outward 
practices.  They  have  no  taste  except  for  the 
exterior  of  this  devotion,  because  they  have  no 
intmor  spirit  of  their  own.  They  will  say  quanti- 
tiea  of  Bosaries  with  the  greatest  precipitation ; 
they  will  hear  many  Masses  distractedly ;  they 
will  go  without  devotion  to  processions;  they 
wiU  enrol  themselves  in  all  sorts  of  confraterni- 
ties, without  amending  their  lives,  without  doing 
any  violence  to  their  passions,  or  without  imi- 
tating the  virtues  of  that  most  holy  Virgin. 
They  have  no  love  but  for  the  sensible  part 
of  devotion,  without  having  any  relish  for  its 
solidity.  If  they  have  not  sensible  sweetness  in 
their  practices,  they  think  they  are  doing  no- 
thing ;  they  get  all  out  of  joint,  throw  every 
thing  up,  or  do  every  thing  at  random.     The 


64  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

there  should  be  njore  people  before  the  altar  of 
the  Blessed  Virgin  than  before  the  Blessed  Sa- 
crament, as  if  the  one  was  contrary  to  the  other, 
as  if  those  who  prayed  to  our  Blessed  Lady  did 
not  pray  to  Jesus  Christ  by  her.  They  are  un- 
willing that  we  should  speak  so  often  of  our 
Lady,  and  address  ourselves  so  frequently  to  her. 
These  are  the  favourite  sentences  constantly  in 
their  mouths :  "  To  what  end  are  so  many  chap- 
lets,  so  many  confraternities,  and  so  many  ex- 
ternal devotions  to  the  Blessed  Virgin  ?  There 
is  much  of  ignorance  in  all  this.  It  makes  a 
mummery  of  our  religion.  Speak  to  us  of  those 
who  are  devout  to  Jesus  Christ"  (yet  they  often 
name  Him  without  uncovering :  I  say  this  by 
way  of  parenthesis).  "  We  must  have  recourse 
to  Jesus  Christ ;  He  is  our  only  Mediator.  We 
must  preach  Jesus  Christ ;  this  is  the  solid  de- 
votion." What  they  say  is  true  in  a  certain 
sense,  but  it  is  very  dangerous,  when,  by  the  ap- 
plication they  make  of  it,  they  hinder  devotion 
to  our  Blessed  Lady,  and  it  is,  under  the  pre- 
text of  a  greater  good,  a  subtle  snare  of  the  evil 
one.  For  never  do  we  honour  Jesus  Christ  more 
than  when  we  are  most  honouring  His  Blessed 
Mother.  Lideed  we  only  honour  Mary  that  we 
may  the  more  perfectly  honour  Jesus,  inasmuch 
as  we  only  go  to  her  as  to  the  way  in  which  we 
are  to  find  the  end  we  are  seeking,  which  is 
JesuB. 


THE  BLBS8SD  YXBGIN.  65 

The  Church,  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  blesses 
our  Lady  first,  and  our  Lord  second, — Benedicta 
tu  in  mulieribu8y  et  benedictus  fntctus  ventris  tui 
Jems.  It  is  not  that  Mary  is  more  than  Jesus, 
or  even  equal  to  Him.  That  would  be  an  into- 
lerable heresy ;  but  it  is  that,  in  order  to  bless 
Jesus  more  perfectly,  we  must  begin  by  blessing 
Mary.  Let  us,  then,  say  with  all  the  true  clients 
of  our  Lady  against  these  false  scrupulous  de- 
votees, 0  Mary,  thou  art  blessed  amongst  all 
women,  and  blessed  is  the  fruit  of  thy  womb, 
Jesus. 

External  devotees  are  persons  who  make  all 
devotion  to  our  Blessed  Lady  consist  in  outward 
practices.  They  have  no  taste  except  for  the 
exterior  of  this  devotion,  because  they  have  no 
interior  spirit  of  their  own.  They  will  say  quanti- 
ties of  Eosaries  with  the  greatest  precipitation ; 
they  will  hear  many  Masses  distractedly ;  they 
will  go  without  devotion  to  processions;  they 
wiU  enrol  themselves  in  all  sorts  of  confraterni- 
ties, without  amending  their  lives,  without  doing 
any  violence  to  their  passions,  or  without  imi- 
tating the  virtues  of  that  most  holy  Virgin. 
They  have  no  love  but  for  the  sensible  part 
of  devotion,  without  having  any  relish  for  its 
solidiiy.  If  they  have  not  sensible  sweetness  in 
their  practices,  they  think  they  are  doing  no- 
ticing; they  get  all  out  of  joint,  throw  every 
thing  up,  or  do  every  thing  at  random.     The 


66  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

world  18  full  of  these  exterior  devotees;  and 
there  are  no  people  who  are  more  critical  of  men 
of  prayer,  of  those  who  foster  an  interior  spirit 
as  the  essential  thing,  while  they  do  not  lightly 
accomit  of  that  outward  modesty  which  always 
accompanies  true  devotion. 

Premmptuous  devotees  are  sinners  abandoned 
to  their  passions,  or  lovers  of  the  world,  who, 
under  the  fair  name  of  Christians  and  clients  of 
our  Blessed  Lady,  conceal  pride,  avarice,  im- 
purity, drunkenness,  anger,  swearing,  detraction, 
injustice,  or  some  other  sin.  They  sleep  in  peace 
in  the  midst  of  their  bad  habits,  without  doing 
any  violence  to  themselves  to  correct  their  faults, 
under  the  pretext  that  they  are  devout  to  the 
Blessed  Virgin.  They  promise  themselves  that 
Gbd  will  pardon  them;  that  they  will  not  be 
allowed  to  die  without  confession ;  and  that  they 
will  not  be  lost  eternally,  because  they  say  the 
Eosary,  because  they  fast  on  Saturdays,  because 
they  belong  to  the  Confraternity  of  the  Holy 
Eosary,  or  wear  the  scapular,  or  are  enrolled 
in  other  congregations,  or  wear  the  little  habit 
or  little  chain  of  our  Lady.*  They  will  not  be- 
lieve us  when  we  tell  them  that  their  devotion  is 
only  an  illusion  of  the  devil,  and  a  pernicious 
presumption  likely  to  destroy  their  souls.  They 
say  that  God  is  good  and  merciful ;  that  He  has 
not  made  us  to  condemn  us  everlastingly ;  that 
*  See  note  farther  on. 


THE  BLESSED  YIBOIK.  67 

no  man  is  without  sin ;  that  they  shall  not  die 
without  confession ;  that  one  good  Peceavi  at  the 
hour  of  death  is  enough ;  that  they  are  devout 
to  our  Lady ;  that  they  wear  the  scapular ;  and 
that  they  say  daily,  without  reproach  or  vanity, 
seven  Paters  and  Aves  in  her  honour ;  and  that 
they  sometimes  say  the  Eosary  and  the  Office  of 
our  Lady,  besides  fasting,  and  other  things.  To 
give  authority  to  all  this,  and  to  blind  themselves 
stiU  further,  they  quote  certain  stories,  which 
they  have  heard  or  read, — it  does  not  matter  to 
them  whether  they  be  true  or  false, — ^relating 
how  people  have  died  in  mortal  sin  without  con- 
fession ;  and  then,  because  in  their  Ufetime  they 
sometimes  said  some  prayers,  or  went  through 
some  practices  of  devotion  to  our  Lady,  how 
they  have  been  raised  to  life  again,  in  order  to 
go  to  confession,  or  their  soul  been  miraculously 
retained  in  their  bodies  till  confession ;  or  how 
they  have  obtained  from  Qt)d  at  the  moment  of 
death  contrition  and  pardon  of  their  sins,  and  so 
have  been  saved ;  and  that  they  themselves  ex- 
pect similar  favours.  Nothing  in  Christianity 
is  more  detestable  than  this  diabolical  presump- 
tion. For  how  can  we  say  truly  that  we  love 
and  honour  our  Blessed  Lady,  when  by  our  sins 
we  are  pitilessly  piercing,  wounding,  crucifying, 
and  outraging  Jesus  Christ  her  Son  ?  If  Mary 
laid  down  a  law  to  herself,  to  save  by  her  mercy 
this  sort  of  people,  she  would  be  authorising 


68  TBUB  DEVOnOH  TO 

crime,  and  aflsisting  to  crucify  and  outrage  her 
Son,  Who  would  dare  to  think  such  a  thought 
as  that? 

I  say,  that  thus  to  abuse  devotion  to  our 
Ladj,  which,  after  devotion  to  our  Lord  in  the 
Blessed  Sacrament,  is  the  holiest  and  solidest  of 
all  devotions,  is  to  be  guilty  of  a  horrible  sacri- 
lege, which,  afl;er  the  sacrilege  of  an  unworthy 
Ciommunion,  is  the  greatest  and  the  least  pardon- 
able of  all  sacrileges. 

I  confess  that,  in  order  to  be  truly  devout  to 
our  Blessed  Lady,  it  is  not  absolutely  necessary 
to  be  so  holy  as  to  avoid  every  sin,  though  tiiis 
were  to  be  wished;  but  so  much  at  least  is 
necessary,  and  I  beg  jou,  to  lay  it  well  to 
heart: — 

1.  To  have  a  sincere  resolution  to  avoid,  at 
least,  all  mortal  sin,  which  outrages  the  Mother 
as  wdl  as  the  Son.  2.  I  would  add  also  that  to 
do  violence  to  ourselves  to  avoid  sin,  to  enrol 
ourselves  in  confraternities,  to  say  the  Eosary  or 
other  prayers,  to  fast  on  Saturdays,  and  the  like^ 
is  wonderftdly  useful  to  the  conversion  of  a  sin- 
iwr,  however  hardened ;  and  if  my  read^  is  such 
a  one,  even  if  he  has  his  foot  in  the  abyss^  I 
would  counsel  these  things  to  him.  Nevertheless 
it  must  be  on  the  condition  that  he  will  only 
practise  these  good  works  with  the  intention  of 
obtaining  from  Gk)d,  by  tbe  intercession  of  the 
Blessed  Virgin,  the  grace  of  contrition  and  the 


THE  BLESSED  YIBQIN.  69 

pardon  of  his  sins,  to  conquer  his  evil  habits, 
and  not  to  remain  quietly  in  the  state  of  sin,  in 
spite  of  the  remorse  of  his  conscience,  the  ex-* 
ample  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Saints,  and  the 
maxims  of  the  holy  GospeL 

The  inconstant  devotees  are  those  who  are 
devout  to  our  Blessed  Lady  by  intervals  and 
whims.  Sometimes  they  are  fervent  and  some- 
times lukewarm.  Sometimes  they  seem  ready 
to  do  any  thing  for  her,  and  then,  a  Utde  after- 
wards, they  are  not  Uke  the  same  people.  They 
begin  by  taJdng  up  all  the  devotions  to  her,  and 
enrolling  themselves  in  the  confraternities ;  and 
then  they  do  not  practise  the  rules  with  fidelity. 
They  change  like  the  moon;  and  Mary  puts 
them  under  her  feet  with  the  crescent,  because 
they  are  mutable,  and  unworthy  to  be  reckoned 
among  the  servants  of  that  faithful  Virgin,  "vdiose 
clients  have  for  their  special  graces  fidelity  and 
0(wastancy.  It  were  better  for  such  persons  to 
load  themselves  with  fewer  prayers  and  prac- 
tices, and  to  fulfil  them  with  faithftdness  and 
love,  in  spite  of  the  world,  the  devil,  and  the 
flesh. 

We  have  still  to  mention  the  false  devotees 
to  our  Blessed  Lady,  who  are  the  ht/pocritical 
devotees ;  who  doke  their  sins  and  sinful  habits 
under  her  mantle,  in  order  to  pass  in  the  eyes  of 
men  for  what  they  are  not. 

There  are  also  the  interested  devotees,  who 

Q 


60  TEUB  DEVOTION  TO 

twinkling  of  an  eye  to  lose  all  their  height  and 
all  their  brightness  I  Whence  comes  that  sad 
and  curious  change  ?  It  has  not  been  for  want 
of  grace,  which  is  wanting  to  no  man ;  but  it 
has  been  want  of  humility.  They  thought 
themselves  stronger  and  more  sufficient  than 
they  were.  They  thought  themselves  capable 
of  guarding  their  own  1a*easures.  They  trusted 
in  themselves,  leaned  upon  themselves.  They 
thought  their  house  secure  enough,  and  their 
coffers  strong  enough,  to  keep  the  precious  trea- 
sure of  their  grace.  It  is  because  of  that 
scarcely  sensible  leaning  upon  themselves,  while 
all  the  while  it  seemed  to  them  that  they  were 
leaning  only  on  the  grace  of  God,  that  the  most 
just  Lord  has  permitted  them  to  be  robbed  by 
leaving  them  to  themselves.  Alas !  if  they  had 
but  known  the  admirable  devotion  which  I  will 
unfold  presently,  they  would  have  confided  their 
treasure  to  a  Virgin,  powerful  and  faithful,  who 
would  have  kept  it  for  them  as  if  it  had  been 
her  own  possession ;  nay,  who  would  have  even 
taken  it  as  an  obligation  of  justice  on  herself 
to  preserve  it  for  them. 

3.  It  is  difficult  to  persevere  in  justice  be- 
cause of  the  strange  corruption  of  the  world. 
The  world  is  now  so  corrupt,  that  it  seems  to  be 
inevitable  that  religious  hearts  should  be  soiled, 
if  not  by  its  mud,  at  least  by  its  dust.  So  that 
it  has  become  a  kind  of  miracle  f(»r  any  one  to 


THE  BLESSED  YIBOIK.  61 

remain  firm  in  the  midst  of  this  impetuous  tor- 
rent without  being  drawn  in  by  it,  in  the  midst 
of  liiat  stormy  sea  without  being  drowned  in  it 
or  stripped  by  the  pirates  and  the  corsairs,  in 
the  midst  of  that  pestilent  air  without  being 
infected  by  it  It  is  the  Virgin,  alone  faithftd, 
in  whom  the  serpent  has  never  had  part,  who 
works  this  miracle  for  those  who  serve  her  in 
that  sweet  way  which  I  have  shortly  to  unfold. 

Having  assumed  these  Five  Truths,  we  must 
now  take  more  pains  than  ever  to  make  a  good 
choice  of  the  true  devotion  to  our  Blessed  Lady. 
There  are  at  this  time,  more  than  ever,  false  devo- 
tions to  our  Blessed  Lady,  which  it  is  easy  to  mis- 
take for  true  ones.  The  devil,  like  a  false  coiner 
and  a  subtle  and  experienced  sharper,  has  already 
deceived  and  destroyed  so  many  souls  by  a  false 
devotion  to  the  Blessed  Virgin,  that  he  makes  a 
daily  use  of  his  diabolical  experience  to  plunge 
many  others  by  this  same  way  into  everlasting 
perdition ;  amusing  them,  lulling  them  to  sleep 
in  sin,  under  the  pretext  of  some  prayers  badly 
said,  or  of  some  outward  practices  which  he  in- 
spires. As  a  false  coiner  does  not  ordinarily 
counterfeit  any  thing  but  gold  and  silver,  or 
very  rarely  the  other  metals,  because  they  are 
not  worth  the  trouble,  so  the  evil  spirit  does 
not  for  the  most  part  counterfeit  the  other  de- 
votions, but  only  those  to  Jesus  and  Mary,  the 
devotion  to  Holy  Communion,  and  to  our  Blessed 


62  TBUE  DEVOTION  TO 

Lady,  because  they  are,  among  other  devotions, 
what  gold  and  silver  are  amongst  metals. 

It  is,  then,  very  important  first  of  all  to 
know  (1)  false  devotions  to  our  Blessed  Lady 
in  order  to  avoid  them;  and  (2)  the  true  de- 
votion in  order  to  embrace  it.  Li  conclusion, 
among  so  many  practices  of  true  devotion  to 
our  Blessed  Lady,  I  will  explain  more  in  detail, 
in  the  second  part  of  this  treatise,  which  is  the 
most  perfect  one,  the  one  most  agreeable  to  our 
Lady,  the  most  glorious  to  Grod,  and  the  most 
sanctifying  to  ourselves,  in  order  that  we  may 
attach  ourselves  to  it. 

1.  On  False  Devotions  to  our  Lady, 
I  find  seven  kinds  of  false  devotees  and 
false  devotions  to  our  Lady,  namely,  (1)  the 
critical  devotees ;  (2)  the  scrupulous  devotees ; 
(3)  the  extxjmal  devotees;  (4)  the  presumptuous 
devotees ;  (5)  the  inconstant  devotees ;  (6)  the 
hypocritical  devotees ;  and  (7)  the  interested 
devotees. 

The  critical  devotees  are,  for  the  most  part, 
proud  scholars,  rash  and  self-sufficient  spirits, 
who  have  at  bottom  some  devotion  to  the  holy 
Virgin,  but  who  criticise  nearly  all  the  practices 
of  devotion  to  her,  which  the  simple  people  pay 
simply  and  hohly  to  their  good  Mother,  because 
these  practices  do  not  fall  in  with  their  own 
humour  and  fancy.     They  call  in  doubt  all  tbe 


THE  BLESSED  YIBOIN.  63 

miracles  and  histories  recorded  by  authors 
worthy  of  our  faith,  or  drawn  from  the  chroni- 
cles of  religious  orders ;  narratives  which  testify 
to  us  the  mercies  and  the  power  of  the  most 
holy  Virgin.  They  cannot  see  without  un- 
easiness simple  and  humble  people  on  their 
knees  before  an  altar  or  an  image  of  our  Lady, 
sometimes  in  the  comer  of  a  street,  in  order  to 
pray  to  God  there ;  and  they  even  accuse  them 
of  idolatry,  as  if  they  adored  the  wood  or  the 
stone.  They  say  that,  for  their  part,  they  are 
not  fond  of  these  external  devotions,  and  that 
their  minds  are  not  so  weak  as  to  give  faith  to 
such  a  number  of  tales  and  little  histories  as  are 
in  circulation  about  our  Lady.  Or,  at  other 
times,  they  reply  that  the  narrators  have  spoken 
as  professional  orators,  with  exaggeration;  or 
they  put  a  bad  interpretation  upon  their  words. 
These  kind  of  false  devotees  and  of  proud  and 
worldly  people  are  greatly  to  be  feared.  They 
do  an  infinite  wrong  to  the  devotion  to  our 
Lady ;  and  they  are  but  too  successful  in  alien- 
ating people  from  it,  under  the  pretext  of  de- 
stroying its  abuses. 

The  scrupulous  devotees  are  those  who  ftar 
to  dishonour  the  Son  by  honouring  the  Mother, 
to  abase  the  one  in  elevating  the  other.  They 
cannot  bear  that  we  should  attribute  to  our  Lady 
ihe  most  just  praises  which  the  holy  Fathers  have 
given  her.     It  is  all  they  can  do  to  endure  that 


bZ  TBUE  DEYOTIOH  TO 

Lady,  because  they  are,  among  other  devotions, 
what  gold  and  silver  are  amongst  metals. 

It  is,  then,  very  important  first  of  all  to 
know  (1)  false  devotions  to  our  Blessed  Lady 
in  order  to  avoid  them ;  and  (2)  the  true  de- 
votion in  order  to  embrace  it.  Li  conclusion, 
among  so  many  practices  of  true  devotion  to 
our  Blessed  Lady,  I  will  explain  more  in  detail, 
in  the  second  part  of  this  treatise,  which  is  the 
most  perfect  one,  the  one  most  agreeable  to  our 
Lady,  the  most  glorious  to  Qtxi,  and  the  most 
sanctifying  to  ourselves,  in  order  that  we  may 
attach  ourselves  to  it. 

1.   On  False  Devotions  to  our  Lady. 

I  find  seven  kinds  of  false  devotees  and 
felse  devotions  to  our  Lady,  namely,  (1)  the 
critical  devotees ;  (2)  the  scrupulous  devotees ; 
(3)  the  extxjmal  devotees;  (4)  the  presumptuous 
devotees ;  (5)  the  inconstant  devotees ;  (6)  the 
hypocritical  devotees;  and  (7)  the  interested 
devotees. 

The  critical  devotees  are,  for  the  most  part, 
proud  scholars,  rash  and  self-sufficient  spirits, 
who  have  at  bottom  some  devotion  to  the  holy 
Virgin,  but  who  criticise  nearly  all  the  practices 
of  devotion  to  her,  which  the  simple  people  pay 
simply  and  holily  to  their  good  Mother,  because 
these  practices  do  not  fall  in  with  their  own 
humour  and  fancy.     They  call  in  doubt  all  the 


THE  BLESSED  YIBOIN.  63 

miracles  and  histories  recorded  by  authors 
worthy  of  our  faith,  or  drawn  from  the  chroni- 
des  of  religious  orders ;  narratives  which  testify 
to  us  the  mercies  and  the  power  of  the  most 
holy  Virgin.  They  cannot  see  without  un- 
easiness simple  and  humble  people  on  their 
knees  before  an  altar  or  an  image  of  our  Lady, 
sometimes  in  the  comer  of  a  street,  in  order  to 
pray  to  Grod  there ;  and  they  even  accuse  them 
of  idolatry,  as  if  they  adored  the  wood  or  the 
stone.  They  say  that,  for  their  part,  they  are 
not  fond  of  these  external  devotions,  and  that 
their  minds  are  not  so  weak  as  to  give  faith  to 
such  a  number  of  tales  and  little  histories  as  are 
in  circulation  about  our  Lady.  Or,  at  other 
times^  they  reply  that  the  narrators  have  spoken 
as  professional  orators,  with  exaggeration;  or 
they  put  a  bad  interpretation  upon  their  words. 
These  kind  of  false  devotees  and  of  proud  and 
worldly  people  are  greatly  to  be  feared.  They 
do  an  infinite  wrong  to  the  devotion  to  our 
Lady ;  and  they  are  but  too  successful  in  alien- 
ating people  from  it,  under  the  pretext  of  de- 
stroying its  abuses. 

The  scrupulous  devotees  are  those  who  ftar 
to  dishonour  the  Son  by  honouring  the  Mother, 
to  abase  the  one  in  elevating  the  other.  They 
cannot  bear  that  we  should  attribute  to  our  Lady 
ihe  most  just  praises  which  the  holy  Fathers  have 
given  her.     It  is  all  they  can  do  to  endure  that 


64  TRUE  DEVOnOH  TO 

there  should  be  njore  people  before  the  altar  of 
the  Blessed  Virgin  than  before  the  Blessed  Sa- 
crament, as  if  the  one  was  contrary  to  the  other, 
as  if  those  who  prayed  to  our  Blessed  Lady  did 
not  pray  to  Jesus  Christ  by  her.  They  are  un- 
willing that  we  should  speak  so  often  of  our 
Lady,  and  address  ourselves  so  frequently  to  her. 
These  are  the  favourite  sentences  constantly  in 
their  mouths :  "  To  what  end  are  so  many  chap- 
lets,  so  many  confraternities,  and  so  many  ex- 
ternal devotions  to  the  Blessed  Virgin  ?  There 
is  much  of  ignorance  in  all  this.  It  makes  a 
mmnmery  of  our  religion.  Speak  to  us  of  those 
who  are  devout  to  Jesus  Christ"  (yet  they  often 
name  Him  without  uncovering :  I  say  this  by 
way  of  parenthesis).  "  We  must  have  recourse 
to  Jesus  Christ ;  He  is  our  only  Mediator.  We 
must  preach  Jesus  Christ ;  this  is  the  solid  de- 
votion." What  they  say  is  true  in  a  certain 
sense,  but  it  is  very  dangerous,  when,  by  the  ap- 
plication they  make  of  it,  they  hinder  devotion 
to  our  Blessed  Lady,  and  it  is,  under  the  pre- 
text of  a  greater  good,  a  subtle  snare  of  the  evil 
one.  For  never  do  we  honour  Jesus  Christ  more 
than  when  we  are  most  honouring  His  Blessed 
Mother.  Lideed  we  only  honour  Mary  that  we 
may  the  more  perfectly  honour  Jesus,  inasmuch 
as  we  only  go  to  her  as  to  the  way  in  which  we 
are  to  find  the  end  we  are  seeking,  which  is 
Jesus. 


THE  BLBS8SD  VIBQIN.  65 

The  Church,  with  the  H0I7  Ghost,  blesses 
our  Lady  first,  and  our  Lord  second, — Benedicta 
tu  in  mulieribusy  et  bemdictua  fructua  ventris  tui 
Jesus.  It  is  not  that  Mary  is  more  than  Jesus^ 
or  even  equal  to  Him.  Tliat  would  be  an  into- 
lerable heresy ;  but  it  is  that,  in  order  to  bless 
Jesus  more  perfectly,  we  must  begin  by  blessing 
Mary.  Let  us,  then,  say  with  all  the  true  clients 
of  our  Lady  against  these  false  scrupulous  de- 
votees, 0  Mary,  thou  art  blessed  amongst  all 
women,  and  blessed  is  the  fruit  of  thy  womb, 
Jesus. 

External  devotees  are  persons  who  make  all 
devotion  to  our  Blessed  Lady  consist  in  outward 
practices.  They  have  no  taste  except  for  the 
exterior  of  this  devotion,  because  they  have  no 
interior  spirit  of  their  own.  They  will  say  quanti- 
ties of  Rosaries  with  the  greatest  precipitation ; 
ihey  will  hear  many  Masses  distractedly ;  they 
will  go  without  devotion  to  processions;  they 
wiU  enrol  themselves  in  all  sorts  of  confratemi- 
ties,  without  amending  their  lives,  without  doing 
any  violence  to  their  passions,  or  without  imi- 
tating the  virtues  of  that  most  holy  Virgin. 
They  have  no  love  but  for  the  sensible  part 
of  devotion,  without  having  any  relish  for  its 
solidity «  If  they  have  not  sensible  sweetness  in 
their  practices,  they  think  they  are  doing  no- 
thing; they  get  aU  out  of  joint,  throw  every 
thing  up,  or  do  every  thing  at  random.     The 


66  TRUE  DEVOTIOH  TO 

world  is  full  of  these  exterior  devotees;  and 
there  are  no  people  who  are  more  critical  of  men 
of  prayer,  of  those  who  foster  an  interior  spirit 
as  the  essential  thing,  while  they  do  not  lightly 
accomit  of  that  outward  modesty  which  always 
accompanies  true  devotion. 

Presumptuous  devotees  are  sinners  abandoned 
to  their  passions,  or  lovers  of  the  world,  who, 
under  the  fair  name  of  Christians  and  clients  of 
our  Blessed  Lady,  conceal  pride,  avarice,  im- 
purity, drunkenness,  anger,  swearing,  detraction, 
injustice,  or  some  other  sin.  They  sleep  in  peace 
in  the  midst  of  their  bad  habits,  without  doing 
any  violence  to  themselves  to  correct  their  faults, 
under  the  pretext  that  they  are  devout  to  the 
Blessed  Virgin.  They  promise  themselves  that 
Gbd  will  pardon  them;  that  they  will  not  be 
allowed  to  die  without  confession ;  and  that  they 
will  not  be  lost  eternally,  because  they  say  the 
Eosary,  because  they  fast  on  Saturdays,  because 
they  belong  to  the  Confraternity  of  the  Holy 
Rosary,  or  wear  the  scapular,  or  are  enrolled 
in  other  congregations,  or  wear  the  little  habit 
or  little  chain  of  our  Lady.*  They  will  not  be- 
lieve us  when  we  tell  them  that  their  devotion  is 
only  an  illusion  of  the  devil,  and  a  pernicious 
presumption  likely  to  destroy  their  souls.  They 
say  that  God  is  good  and  merciful ;  that  He  has 
not  made  us  to  condemn  us  everlastingly ;  that 
*  See  note  farther  on. 


THE  BLESSED  YIBOIK.  67 

no  man  is  without  sin ;  that  they  shall  not  die 
without  confession ;  that  one  good  Peccavi  at  the 
hour  of  death  is  enough ;  that  they  are  devout 
to  our  Lady ;  that  they  wear  the  scapular ;  and 
that  they  say  daily,  without  reproach  or  vanity, 
seven  Paters  and  Aves  in  her  honour ;  and  that 
they  sometimes  say  the  Eosary  and  the  Office  of 
our  Lady,  besides  fasting,  and  other  things.  To 
give  authority  to  all  this,  and  to  blind  themselves 
still  further,  they  quote  certain  stories,  which 
they  have  heard  or  read, — it  does  not  matter  to 
them  whether  they  be  true  or  false, — relating 
how  people  have  died  in  mortal  sin  witiiout  con- 
fession ;  and  then,  because  in  their  lifetime  they 
sometimes  said  some  prayers,  or  went  through 
some  practices  of  devotion  to  our  Lady,  how 
they  have  been  raised  to  life  again,  in  order  to 
go  to  confession,  or  their  soul  been  miraculously 
retained  in  their  bodies  till  confession ;  or  how 
they  have  obtained  from  God  at  the  moment  of 
death  contrition  and  pardon  of  their  sins,  and  so 
have  been  saved ;  and  that  they  themselves  ex- 
pect similar  favours.  Nothing  in  Christianity 
is  more  detestable  than  this  diabolical  presump- 
tion. For  how  can  we  say  truly  that  we  love 
and  honour  our  Blessed  Lady,  when  by  our  sins 
we  are  pitilessly  piercing,  wounding,  crucifying, 
and  outraging  Jesus  Christ  her  Son  ?  If  Mary 
laid  down  a  law  to  herself,  to  save  by  her  mercy 
this  sort  of  people,  she  would  be  authorising 


68  TRUE  DEVOnOK  TO 

crime,  and  assisting  to  crucify  and  outrage  her 
Son.  Who  would  dare  to  think  sudi  a  thought 
as  that? 

I  say,  that  thus  to  ahuse  devotion  to  our 
Lady,  which,  after  devotion  to  our  Lord  in  the 
Blessed  Sacrament,  is  the  holiest  and  solidest  of 
all  devotions,  is  to  he  guilty  of  a  horrible  sacri- 
lege, which,  after  the  sacrilege  of  an  imworthy 
Communion,  is  the  greatest  and  the  least  pardon- 
able of  all  sacrileges. 

I  confess  that,  in  order  to  be  truly  devout  to 
our  Blessed  Lady,  it  is  not  absolutely  necessairy 
to  be  so  holy  as  to  avoid  every  sin,  though  this 
were  to  be  wished;  but  so  much  at  least  is 
necessary,  and  I  beg  you  to  lay  it  well  to 
heart: — 

1.  To  have  a  sincere  resolution  to  avoid,  at 
least,  all  mortal  sin,  which  outrages  the  Mother 
as  wdl  as  the  Son.  2.  I  would  add  also  that  to 
do  violence  to  ourselves  to  avoid  sin,  to  enrol 
ourselves  in  confraternities,  to  say  the  Bosary  or 
other  prayers,  to  fast  on  Saturdays,  and  the  like, 
is  wonderftdly  useftil  to  the  conversion  of  a  sin- 
ner, however  hardened ;  and  if  my  readw  is  sudi 
a  one,  even  if  he  has  his  foot  in  the  abyss,  I 
would  counsel  these  things  to  him.  Nevertheless 
it  must  be  on  the  condition  that  he  will  only 
practise  these  good  works  with  the  intention  of 
obtaining  from  Grod,  by  the  intercession  of  the 
Blessed  Virgin,  the  grace  of  contriticm  and  the 


THE  BLESSSD  VIBQIK.  69 

pardon  of  his  sins,  to  conquer  his  evil  habits^ 
and  not  to  remain  quietly  in  the  state  of  sin,  in 
spite  of  the  remorse  of  his  conscience,  the  ex- 
ample of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Saints,  and  the 
maxims  of  the  holy  GlospeL 

The  inconstard  devotees  are  those  who  are 
devout  to  our  Blessed  Lady  by  intervals  and 
whims.  Sometimes  they  are  fervent  and  some- 
times lukewarm.  Sometimes  they  seem  ready 
to  do  any  thing  for  her,  and  then,  a  little  after- 
wards, they  are  not  like  the  same  people.  They 
begin  by  taking  up  all  the  devotions  to  her,  and 
enrolling  themselves  in  the  confraternities ;  and 
then  they  do  not  practise  the  rules  with  fideliiy. 
They  change  like  the  moon;  and  Mary  puts 
them  under  her  feet  with  the  crescent,  because 
they  are  mutable,  and  unworthy  to  be  reckoned 
among  the  servants  of  that  faithftd  Virgin,  whose 
clients  have  for  their  special  graces  fideUty  and 
constancy.  It  were  better  for  such  persons  to 
load  themselves  with  fewer  prayers  and  prac- 
tices, and  to  fiilfil  them  with  faithftdness  and 
love,  in  spite  of  the  world,  the  devil,  and  the 
flesh. 

We  have  still  to  mention  the  false  devotees 
to  our  Blessed  Lady,  who  are  the  hypocritical 
devotees ;  who  doke  their  sins  and  sinfiil  habits 
under  her  mantle,  in  order  to  pass  in  the  eyes  of 
men  for  what  they  are  not. 

There  are  also  the  interested  devotees,  who 

Q 


70  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

have  recourse  to  our  Lady  only  to  gain  some 
lawsuit,  or  to  avoid  some  danger,  or  to  be  cured 
of  some  illness,  or  for  some  other  similar  ne- 
cessiiy,  without  which  they  would  forget  her 
altogether.  Both,  however,  of  these  two  last 
classes  are  false  devotees,  and  neither  of  them 
pass  current  before  QoA.  and  His  holy  Mother. 

Let  us,  then,  take  great  care  not  to  be  of  the 
number  of  the  critical  devotees,  who  believe 
nothing  and  criticise  every  thing ;  nor  of  the 
scrupulous  devotees,  who  are  afraid  of  being  too 
devout  to  oiu:  Lady,  out  of  respect  to  our  Lord ; 
nor  of  the  exterior  devotees,  who  make  all  their 
devotion  consist  in  outward  practices ;  nor  of  the 
presumptuous  devotees,  who,  under  the  pretext 
of  their  false  devotion  to  the  Blessed  Virgin, 
wallow  in  their  sins ;  nor  of  the  inconstant  de- 
votees, who  by  leviiy  change  their  practices  of 
devotion,  or  throw  them  up  altogether  on  the 
least  temptation;  nor  of  the  Aj(pom<icaZ  devotees, 
who  put  themselves  into  confraternities,  and  wear 
the  liveries  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  in  order  to 
pass  for  good  people ;  nor,  finally,  of  the  interested 
devotees,  who  only  have  recourse  to  our  Lady  to 
be  delivered  from  bodily  evils,  or  to  obtain  tem- 
poral goods. 

2.   On  tJie  Characters  of  True  Devotion  to  our 
Blessed  Lady. 
After  having  laid  bare  and  condenmed  the 


THE  BLESSED  VIBOIK.  71 

fiJse  devotions  to  the  most  holy  Virgin,  we  must, 
in  a  few  words,  characterise  the  true  devotion. 
It  must  be  (1)  interior^  (2)  tender^  (3)  /wZy, 
(4)  constant^  and  (5)  disinterested. 

1.  True  devotion  to  our  Lady  is  interior; 
that  is  to  say,  it  comes  from  the  spirit  and  the 
heart.  It  flows  from  the  esteem  we  have  of  her, 
the  high  idea  we  have  formed  of  her  great- 
ness, and  the  love  which  we  liave  for  her. 

2.  It  is  tender ;  that  is  to  say,  ftill  of  confi- 
dence in  her,  like  a  child's  confidence  in  his 
loving  mother.  This  confidence  makes  the  soul 
have  recourse  to  her  in  all  its  bodily  or  mental 
necessities,  with  much  simplicity,  trust,  and 
tenderness.  It  implores  the  aid  of  its  good 
Mother,  at  all  times,  in  all  places,  and  about  all 
things ;  in  its  doubts,  that  it  may  be  enlightened ; 
in  its  wanderings,  that  it  may  be  brought  into 
the  right  path;  in  its  temptations,  that  it  may 
be  supported ;  in  its  weaknesses,  that  it  may  be 
strengthened ;  in  its  falls,  that  it  may  be  lifted 
up;  in  its  discouragements,  that  it  may  be 
cheered ;  in  its  scruples,  that  they  may  be  taken 
away ;  in  its  crosses,  toils,  and  disappointments 
of  life,  that  it  may  be  consoled  under  them.  In 
a  word,  in  all  its  evils  of  body  and  mind,  the 
soul's  ordinary  reftige  is  in  Mary,  without  fear- 
ing to  be  importunate  to  her  or  to  displease 
Jesus  Christ. 

3.  True  devotion  to  our  Lady  is  holy;  that 


73  TRUE  DEVOnOK  TO 

is  to  say,  it  leads  the  soul  to  avoid  sin,  and  to 
imitate  in  the  Blessed  Virgin  particularly  her 
profound  humiliiy,  her  lively  faith,  her  continual 
prayer,  her  universal  mortification,  her  divine 
purity,  her  ardent  charity,  her  heroic  patience^ 
her  angelical  sweetness,  and  her  divine  wisdom. 
These  are  the  ten  principal  virtues  of  the  most 
holy  Virgin. 

4.  True  devotion  to  our  Lady  is  constant 
It  confirms  the  soul  in  good,  and  it  does  not 
let  it  easily  abandon  its  spiritual  exerdses.  It 
makes  it  courageous  in  opposing  the  world  in 
its  fashions  and  maxims,  the  flesh  in  its  weari- 
nesses and  passions,  and  the  devil  in  his  temp- 
tations. So  that  a  person  truly  devout  to  our 
Blessed  Lady  is  neither  changeable,  irritable, 
scrupulous,  nor  timid.  It  is  not  that  such  a 
person  does  not  fall,  or  change  sometimes  in  the 
sensible  feeling  of  devotion,  or  in  the  amoimt 
of  devotion  itself.  But  when  he  falls,  he  rises 
again  by  stretching  out  his  hand  to  his  good 
Mother.  If  he  loses  the  taste  and  relish  of  de- 
votion, he  does  not  disturb  himself  because  oi 
that ;  for  the  just  and  fiuthful  client  of  Mary 
lives  on  the  faith  of  Jesus  and  Mary,  and  not 
on  sentiments  and  sensibilities. 

6.  Lastly,  true  devotion  to  our  Blessed  Lady 

is  disinterested  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  inspires  the  soul 

not  to  seek  itself  but  God  only,  and  God  in  His 

V  Mother.     A  true  client  of  Mary  does  not 


THE  BLI88BD  YIBfiDT.  73 

Borve  that  august  Queen  from  a  spirit  of  lucre 
and  interest,  nor  for  its  own  good,  \diether 
temporal,  corporal,  or  spiritual ;  but  exclusively 
because  she  merits  to  be  served,  and  Qod  alone 
in  her.  He  does  not  love  Mary  precisely  be- 
cause she  does  him  good,  or  because  he  hopes 
in  her ;  but  because  she  is  so  worfliy  of  love. 
It  is  on  this  account  that  he  loves  and  serves 
her  as  £dthAilly  in  his  disgusts  and  drynesses, 
as  in  his  sweetnesses  and  sensible  fervours.  He 
loves  her  as  much  on  Calvary,  as  at  the  marriage 
of  Oana.  Oh  I  how  such  a  client  of  our  Blessed 
Lady,  who  has  no  self-seeking  in  his  service  of 
her,  is  agreeable  and  precious  in  the  eyes  of 
God  and  of  His  holy  Mother  I  But  in  these 
days  how  rare  is  such  a  sight  I  It  is  that  it 
may  be  less  rare  that  I  have  taken  my  pen  to 
put  on  paper  what  I  have  taught,  in  public  and 
in  private,  during  my  missions  for  many  years. 

I  have  now  said  many  things  about  the  most 
holy  Virgin ;  but  I  have  many  more  to  say,  and 
Hxere  are  iniSnitely  more  which  I  shall  omit, 
whether  from  ignorance,  inabiUiy,  or  want  of 
time,  in  ilie  design  which  I  have  to  form  a  true 
dient  of  Mary,  and  a  true  disciple  of  Jesus 
Ohrist. 

Oh  I  but  my  labour  will  have  been  well  ex- 
pended if  this  little  Writing,  fidling  into  the 
hands  of  a  soul  of  good  dispositions,  a  soul  well 
bom^ — ^bom  of  Qod  and  of  Mary,  and  not  of 


74  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will 
of  man, — should  unfold  to  him,  and  should,  by  the 
grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  inspire  him  with,  the 
excellence  and  the  price  of  that  true  and  solid 
devotion  to  our  Blessed  Lady,  which  I  am  going 
presently  to  describe.  If  I  knew  that  my  guilty 
blood  could  serve  in  engraving  upon  any  one's 
heart  the  truths  which  I  am  writing  in  honour 
of  my  true  Mother  and  sovereign  Mistress,  I 
would  use  my  blood  instead  of  ink  to  form  the 
letters,  in  the  hope  to  find  some  good  souls  who, 
by  their  fidelity  to  the  practice  which  I  teach, 
shall  compensate  to  my  dear  Mother  and  Mis- 
tress for  the  losses  which  she  has  suffered 
through  my  ingratitude  and  infidelities.  I  feel 
myself  more  than  ever  animated  to  believe  and 
to  hope  all  which  I  have  had  deeply  engraven 
upon  my  heart,  and  have  asked  of  Grod  these 
many  years,  namely,  that  sooner  or  later  the 
Blessed  Virgin  shall  have  more  children,  ser- 
vants, and  slaves  of  love  than  ever ;  and  that, 
by  this  means,  Jesus  Christ,  my  dear  Maj^ter, 
shall  reign  more  in  hearts  than  ever. 

I  clearly  foresee  that  raging  beasts  shall  come 
in  fiiry  to  tear  with  their  diabolical  teeth  this 
little  Writing  and  him  whom  the  Holy  Ghost 
has  made  use  of  to  write  it,  or  at  least  to  smother 
it  in  the  silence  of  a  coffer,  that  it  may  not 
appear.  They  shall  even  attack  and  persecute 
those  who  shall  read  it  and  carry  it  out  in  prac- 


THE  BLESSED  VIBOIK. 


75 


tioe.  But  what  matter  ?  On  the  contrary,  so 
much  the  better  I  This  very  foresight  encom^ages 
me,  and  makes  me  hope  for  a  great  success ;  that 
is  to  say,  for  a  great  squadron  of  brave  and  va- 
liant soldiers  of  Jesus  and  Mary,  of  both  sexes, 
to  combat  the  world,  the  devil,  and  corrupted 
nature  in  those  more  than  ever  perilous  times 
which  are  about  to  come  I  Qui  legitj  mtelligat. 
Qui  potest  capere^  capiat. 


96  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

Qod,  says  Si  Bernard,  seeing  that  we  are 
unworthy  to  receive  His  graces  immediatelj 
from  His  own  hand,  gives  them  to  Mary,  in 
order  that  we  may  have  through  her  whatever 
He  wills  to  give  us ;  and  He  also  finds  His  glory 
in  receiving  through  the  hands  of  Mary  the  gra- 
titude, respect,  and  love,  which  we  owe  Him 
for  His  benefits.  It  is  most  just,  then,  that  we 
should  imitate  this  conduct  of  God,  in  order,  as 
the  same  St.  Bernard  says,  that  the  grace  should 
return  to  its  Author  by  the  same  canal  through 
which  it  came:  Ut  eodem  alveo  ad  laryitarem 
gratia  gratia  redeaty  quoJltuciL  * 

This  is  precisely  what  our  devotion  does. 
We  offer  and  consecrate  all  we  are  and  all  we 
have  to  the  Blessed  Virgin,  in  order  that  our 
Lord  may  receive  through  her  mediation  the 
glory  and  the  gratitude  which  we  owe  Ham. 
We  acknowledge  ourselves  unworthy  and  unfit 
to  approach  His  Infinite  Majesty  by  ourselves ; 
and  it  is  on  this  account  that  we  avail  ourselves 
of  the  intercession  of  the  most  holy  Virgin. 

Moreover,  this  devotion  is  a  practice  of 
great  humility,  which  God  loves  above  all  the 
other  virtues.  A  soul  which  exalts  itself  abasea 
Gk)d ;  a  soul  which  abases  itself  exalts  QtxL 
God  resists  the  proud,  and  gives  His  grace  to 
the  humble.  If  you  abase  yourself,  thinking 
yourself  unworthy  to  appear  before  Him  and 
to  draw  nigh  to  Him,  He  .descends,  and  lowers 


THE  BLESSED  VIBOIK. 


75 


tioe.  But  what  matter  ?  On  the  contrary,  so 
much  the  better  I  This  very  foresight  encourages 
me,  and  makes  me  hope  for  a  great  success ;  that 
is  to  say,  for  a  great  squadron  of  brave  and  va- 
liant soldiers  of  Jesus  and  Mary,  of  both  sexes, 
to  combat  the  world,  the  devil,  and  corrupted 
nature  in  those  more  than  ever  perilous  times 
which  are  about  to  come  I  Qui  legit,  inteUigat. 
Qui  potest  capere,  capiat. 


98  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

herself  his  baQ^  his  sapplement,  and  his  dear 
all  towards  Jesns.  In  a  word^  as  that  person 
is  all  consecrated  to  Mary,  so  is  Marj  all  for 
him ;  after  such  a  £ishion  that  we  can  say  of 
that  perfect  servant  and  child  of  Mary  what 
St  John  the  Evangelist  said  of  himself,  that  he 
took  the  holy  Virgin  for  all  his  goods, — Accepit 
earn  discipuhM  in  sucu 

It  is  this  which  produces  in  the  soul,  if  it  is 
fiuthfid,  a  great  distrust,  contempt,  and  hatred 
of  self,  and  a  great  confidence  and  a  great  self- 
abandonment  in  the  Blessed  Virgin,  its  good 
Mistress.  A  man  no  longer,  as  before,  leans  on 
his  own  dispositions,  intentions,  merits,  and  good 
w(»rks ;  because,  having  made  an  entire  sacrifice 
of  them  to  Jesus  Christ  by  that  good  Mother, 
he  has  but  one  treasure  now,  where  all  his  goods 
are  laid  up,  and  that  is  no  longer  in  himself; 
for  his  treasure  is  Mary.  It  is  this  which  makes 
him  approach  oiy*  Lord  without  servile  or  scru- 
pulous fear,  and  pray  to  Him  with  great  confi- 
dence. It  is  this  which  makes  him  enter  into 
the  sentiments  of  the  devout  and  learned  Abbot 
Bupert,  who,  making  an  allusion  to  the  victory 
that  Jacob  gained  over  the  angel,  said  to  our 
Blessed  Lady  these  beautiful  words :  "  0  Mary, 
my  Princess,  Immaculate  Mother  of  a  God-man, 
Jesus  Christ,  I  desire  to  wrestle  with  that  Man, 
namely,  the  Divine  Word,  not  armed  with  my 
own  merits,  but  with  yours."     0  Domino^  Dei 


THE  BLESSED  VIRGIN.  99 

genitrix  Maria^  et  incorrupta  Mater  Dei  et 
Saminisj  nan  meisy  sed  tuis  armatus  meritisy  cum 
isto  VirOy  seu  VerboDeiy  luctari  cupio  (Rup.  Pro- 
log.  in  Cantic.), 

Oh,  how  strong  and  mighty  we  are  with 
Jesus  Christ,  when  we  are  armed  with  the  wor- 
thy merits  and  intercession  of  the  Mother  of 
Grod,  who,  as  St.  Augustine  says,  has  lovingly 
vanquished  the  Most  High. 

2.  As  by  this  practice  we  give  to  our  Lord 
by  His  Mother's  hands  all  our  good  works,  that 
good  Mother  purifies  them,  embellishes  them, 
and  makes  them  acceptable  to  her  Son. 

(1)  She  purifies  them  of  all  the  soil  of  self- 
love,  and  of  tliat  imperceptible  attachment  to  the 
creature,  which  slips  incessantly  into  our  best 
actions.  As  soon  as  they  are  in  her  most  pure 
and  fruitfiil  hands,  those  same  hands,  which  have 
pever  been  sullied  or  idle,  and  which  purify 
whatever  they  touch,  take  away  firom  the  present 
which  we  ms^e  to  her  all  that  was  spoilt  or  im^ 
perfect  about  it. 

(2)  She  embellishes  our  works,  in  adorning 
them  with  her  own  merits  and  virtues.  It  is  as 
if  a  peasant,  wishing  to  gain  the  firiendship  and 
benevolence  of  the  king,  went  to  the  queen,  and 
presented  her  with  a  fruit,  which  was  his  whole 
revenue,  in  order  that  she  might  present  it  to 
the  king.  The  queen,  having  accepted  the  poor 
little  offering  from  the  peasant,  would  place  the 


100  TBOE  BXVOTION  TO 

firuit  on  a  large  and  beantifiil  dish  of  goM,  and 
eoj  on  the  peasant's  hehalf,  would  pres^it  it  to 
the  king.  Then  the  fruit,  however  unworthy  in 
itself  to  be  a  king's  present,  would  become  worthy 
of  his  majesty,  because  of  the  dish  of  gold  on 
which  it  rested  and  the  person  who  presented  it. 

(3)  She  presents  these  good  works  to  Jesus 
Christ ;  for  she  keeps  nothing  of  what  is  given 
for  herself,  as  if  she  was  our  last  end.  She  refers 
it  all  feithftdly  to  Jesus.  Kwe  give  to  hw^  we 
give  necessarily  to  Jesus ;  if  we  praise  her  or 
glorify  her,  we  at  once  praise  and  glorify  Jesus. 
As  of  old,  when  St.  Elizabeth  praised  her,  so 
now,  when  we  praise  and  bless  her,  she  sings 
herself,  MagiAficat  anima  mea  Dominum. 

(4)  She  persuades  Jesus  to  accept  these  good 
works,  however  little  and  poor  the  present  may 
be  for  that  Saint  of  saints  and  that  King  of  kings. 
When  we  present  any  tiling  to  Jesus  by  ourselves j 
and  relying  on  our  own  industry  and  disposition, 
Jesus  examines  the  offering,  and  often  rejects  it 
because  of  the  stains  it  has  contracted  through 
sdf-love ;  just  as  of  old  He  rejected  the  sacrifices 
of  the  Jews  when  ihey  were  full  of  their  own 
will.  But  when  we  present  Him  any  thing  by 
the  pure  and  virginal  hands  of  His  Well-beloved, 
we  take  Him  by  His  weak  side,  if  it  is  allowaUe 
to  use  such  a  term.  He  does  not  consider  so 
much  the  thing  that  is  given  Him,  as  the  Mother 
who  gives  it.     He  does  not  consider  so  modi 


n 


:  jiiir  •  ri^iL.  we  noK. 

MBKseBBt  IB-  jrm:  oeroOoiL 

-MmiTj.  11    ymBtr,    Z)  haty, 

i  iOmaiurfakfL. 

OL  Munr  ucr  3  intenor 

jtlb«'«BieBU:  wt  jare  ot  iier. 
jBTt  i(9nna-  or  ie 

Jiiat  I-  t»>  KT,  f^' 

tiic  «jd  «jf 

Jracitmay 
I  it  ma}  f 


ji=  *• 


|i  «P«r 


-=^.*^" 


64  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

there  should  be  njore  people  before  the  altar  of 
the  Blessed  Virgin  than  before  the  Blessed  Sa- 
crament, as  if  the  one  was  contrary  to  the  other, 
as  if  those  who  prayed  to  our  Blessed  Lady  did 
not  pray  to  Jesus  Christ  by  her.  They  are  un- 
willing that  we  should  speak  so  often  of  our 
Lady,  and  address  ourselves  so  frequently  to  her. 
These  are  the  favourite  sentences  constantly  in 
their  mouths :  "  To  what  end  are  so  many  chap- 
lets,  so  many  confraternities,  and  so  many  ex- 
ternal devotions  to  the  Blessed  Virgin  ?  There 
is  much  of  ignorance  in  all  this.  It  makes  a 
mummery  of  our  religion.  Speak  to  us  of  those 
who  are  devout  to  Jesus  Christ"  (yet  they  often 
name  Him  without  imcovering :  I  say  this  by 
way  of  parenthesis).  "  We  must  have  recourse 
to  Jesus  Christ ;  He  is  our  only  Mediator.  We 
must  preach  Jesus  Christ ;  this  is  the  solid  de- 
votion." What  they  say  is  true  in  a  certain 
sense,  but  it  is  very  dangerous,  when,  by  the  ap- 
plication they  make  of  it,  they  hinder  devotion 
to  our  Blessed  Lady,  and  it  is,  under  the  pre- 
text of  a  greater  good,  a  subtle  snare  of  the  evil 
one.  For  never  do  we  honour  Jesus  Christ  more 
than  when  we  are  most  honouring  His  Blessed 
Mother.  Lideed  we  only  honour  Mary  that  we 
may  the  more  perfectly  honour  Jesus,  inasmuch 
as  we  only  go  to  her  as  to  the  way  in  which  we 
are  to  find  the  end  we  are  seeking,  which  is 
Jesus. 


THE  BLESSED  VIRGIN.  65 

The  Church,  with  the  Holy  Qhost,  blesses 
our  Lady  first,  and  our  Lord  second, — Benedicta 
tu  in  mulieribusy,  et  benedicius  fntctits  vmtria  tui 
Jema.  It  is  not  that  Mary  is  more  than  Jesus^ 
or  even  equal  to  Him.  That  would  be  an  into- 
lerable heresy ;  but  it  is  that,  in  order  to  bless 
Jesus  more  perfectly,  we  must  begin  by  blessing 
Mary.  Let  us,  then,  say  with  all  the  true  clients 
of  our  Lady  against  these  felse  scrupulous  de- 
votees, 0  Mary,  thou  art  blessed  amongst  all 
women,  and  blessed  is  the  fruit  of  thy  womb, 
Jesus. 

External  devotees  are  persons  who  make  all 
devotion  to  our  Blessed  Lady  consist  in  outward 
practices.  They  have  no  taste  except  for  the 
exterior  of  this  devotion,  because  they  have  no 
interior  spirit  of  their  own.  They  will  say  quanti- 
ties of  Bosaries  with  the  greatest  precipitation ; 
they  will  hear  many  Masses  distractedly ;  they 
will  go  without  devotion  to  processions;  they 
wilt  enrol  themselves  in  all  sorts  of  confraterni- 
ties, without  amending  their  lives,  without  doing 
auy  violence  to  their  passions,  or  without  imi- 
tating the  virtues  of  that  most  holy  Virgin. 
They  have  no  love  but  for  the  sensible  part 
of  devotion,  without  having  any  relish  for  its 
solidiiy.  If  they  have  not  sensible  sweetness  in 
their  practices,  they  think  they  are  doing  no- 
thing; they  get  all  out  of  joint,  throw  every 
thing  up,  or  do  every  thing  at  random.     The 


66  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

world  is  fiall  of  these  exterior  devotees;  and 
there  are  no  people  who  are  more  critical  of  men 
of  prayer,  of  those  who  foster  an  interior  spirit 
as  the  essential  thing,  while  they  do  not  lightly 
account  of  that  outward  modesty  which  always 
accompanies  true  devotion. 

Premmptuoua  devotees  are  sinners  abandoned 
to  their  passions,  or  lovers  of  the  world,  who, 
under  the  fair  name  of  Christians  and  clients  of 
our  Blessed  Lady,  conceal  pride,  avarice,  im- 
purity, drunkenness,  anger,  swearing,  detraction, 
injustice,  or  some  other  sin.  They  sleep  in  peace 
in  the  midst  of  their  bad  habits,  without  doing 
any  violence  to  Aemselves  to  correct  their  faults, 
under  the  pretext  that  they  are  devout  to  the 
Blessed  Virgin.  They  promise  themselves  that 
Grod  will  pardon  them;  that  they  will  not  be 
allowed  to  die  without  confession ;  and  that  they 
will  not  be  lost  eternally,  because  they  say  the 
Eosary,  because  they  fast  on  Saturdays,  because 
they  belong  to  the  Confraternity  of  the  Holy 
Rosary,  or  wear  the  scapular,  or  are  enrolled 
in  other  congregations,  or  wear  the  little  habit 
or  little  chain  of  our  Lady.*  They  will  not  be- 
lieve us  when  we  tell  them  that  their  devotion  is 
only  an  illusion  of  the  devil,  and  a  pernicious 
presumption  likely  to  destroy  their  souls.  They 
say  that  God  is  good  and  merciful ;  that  He  has 
not  made  us  to  condemn  us  everlastingly ;  that 
♦  See  note  farther  on. 


THE  BLESSED  YIBOIN.  67 

no  man  is  without  sin ;  that  they  shall  not  die 
without  confession ;  that  one  good  Peccavi  at  the 
hour  of  death  is  enough ;  that  they  are  devout 
to  our  Lady ;  that  they  wear  the  scapular ;  and 
that  they  say  daily,  without  reproach  or  vanity, 
seven  Paters  and  Aves  in  her  honour ;  and  that 
they  sometimes  say  the  Eosary  and  the  Office  of 
our  Lady,  besides  fasting,  and  other  things.  To 
give  authority  to  all  this,  and  to  blind  themselves 
still  further,  they  quote  certain  stories,  which 
they  have  heard  or  read, — it  does  not  matter  to 
them  whether  they  be  true  or  false, — ^relating 
how  people  have  died  in  mortal  sin  without  con- 
fession ;  and  then,  because  in  their  lifetime  they 
sometimes  said  some  prayers,  or  went  through 
some  practices  of  devotion  to  our  Lady,  how 
they  have  been  raised  to  life  again,  in  order  to 
go  to  confession,  or  their  soul  been  miraculously 
retained  in  their  bodies  till  confession ;  or  how 
they  have  obtained  from  God  at  the  moment  of 
death  contrition  and  pardon  of  their  sins,  and  so 
have  been  saved ;  and  that  they  themselves  ex- 
pect similar  favours.  Nothing  in  Christianity 
is  more  detestable  than  this  diabolical  presump- 
tion. For  how  can  we  say  truly  that  we  love 
and  honour  our  Blessed  Lady,  when  by  oiu*  sins 
we  are  pitilessly  piercing,  wounding,  crucifying, 
and  outraging  Jesus  Cluist  her  Son  ?  If  Mary 
laid  down  a  law  to  herself,  to  save  by  her  mercy 
this  sort  of  people,  she  would  be  authorising 


68  TRUE  DEVOnOK  TO 

crime,  and  assisting  to  crucify  and  outrage  her 
Son.  Who  would  dare  to  think  such  a  thought 
as  that? 

I  say,  that  thus  to  abuse  devotion  to  our 
Lady,  which,  after  devotion  to  our  Lord  in  the 
Blessed  Sacrament,  is  the  holiest  and  solidest  of 
all  devotions,  is  to  be  guilty  of  a  horrible  sacri- 
lege, which,  aft;er  the  sacrilege  of  an  unworthy 
Communion,  is  the  greatest  and  the  least  pardon- 
able of  all  sacrileges. 

I  confess  that,  in  order  to  be  truly  devout  to 
our  Blessed  Lady,  it  is  not  absolutely  necessaiy 
to  be  so  holy  as  to  avoid  every  sin,  though  this 
were  to  be  wished;  Imt  so  much  at  least  is 
necessary,  and  I  beg  you  to  lay  it  well  to 
heart: — 

1.  To  have  a  sincere  resolution  to  avoid,  at 
least,  aU  mortal  sin,  which  outrages  the  Mother 
as  w^  as  the  Son.  2.  I  would  add  also  that  to 
do  violence  to  ourselves  to  avoid  sin,  to  enrol 
ourselves  in  confraternities,  to  say  the  Bosary  or 
other  prayers,  to  fast  on  Saturdays,  and  the  like, 
is  wonderfully  usefol  to  the  conversion  of  a  sm- 
ner,  however  hardened ;  and  if  my  reader  is  such 
a  one,  even  if  he  has  his  foot  in  the  abyss,  I 
would  counsel  these  things  to  him.  Nevertheless 
it  must  be  on  the  condition  that  he  will  only 
practise  these  good  works  with  the  intention  of 
obtaining  from  Gk)d,  by  the  intercession  of  the 
Blessed  Virgin,  the  grace  of  contrition  and  the 


THE  BUSSSSD  YIBGIK.  69 

pardon  of  his  sins,  to  conquer  his  evil  habits^ 
and  not  to  remain  quietly  in  the  state  of  sin,  in 
spite  of  the  remorse  of  his  conscience,  the  ex- 
ample of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Saints,  and  the 
maxims  of  the  holj  GK)speL 

The  mconatant  devotees  are  those  who  are 
devout  to  our  Blessed  Lady  by  intervals  and 
whims.  Sometimes  they  are  fervent  and  some- 
times lukewarm.  Sometimes  they  seem  ready 
to  do  any  thing  for  her,  and  then,  a  little  after- 
wards, they  are  not  like  the  same  people.  They 
begin  by  taking  up  aU  the  devotions  to  her,  and 
enrolling  themselves  in  the  confraternities ;  and 
then  they  do  not  practise  the  rules  with  fidelity. 
They  change  like  the  moon;  and  Mary  puts 
them  under  her  feet  with  the  crescent,  because 
they  are  mutable,  and  unworthy  to  be  reckoned 
among  the  servants  of  that  faithful  Virgin,  whose 
clients  have  for  their  special  graces  fidelity  and 
ocmstancy.  It  were  better  for  such  persons  to 
load  themselves  with  fewer  prayers  and  prac- 
tices, and  to  ftdfil  them  with  faithftdness  and 
love,  in  spite  of  the  world,  the  devil,  and  the 
flesh. 

We  have  still  to  mention  the  false  devotees 
to  our  Blessed  Lady,  who  are  the  hypocritical 
devotees ;  who  cloke  their  sins  and  sinfiil  habits 
under  her  mantle,  in  order  to  pass  in  the  eyes  of 
men  for  what  they  are  not. 

There  are  also  the  interested  devotees,  who 

G 


70  TBUE  DEVOTIOK  TO 

have  recourse  to  our  Lady  only  to  gain  some 
lawsuit^  or  to  avoid  some  danger,  or  to  be  cured 
of  some  illness,  or  for  some  other  similar  ne- 
cessity, without  which  they  would  forget  her 
altogether.  Both,  however,  of  these  two  last 
classes  are  false  devotees,  and  neither  of  them 
pass  current  before  God  and  His  holy  Mother. 

Let  us,  then,  take  great  care  not  to  be  of  the 
number  of  the  critical  devotees,  who  believe 
nothing  and  criticise  every  thing ;  nor  of  the 
scrupulous  devotees,  who  are  afraid  of  being  too 
devout  to  our  Lady,  out  of  respect  to  our  Lord ; 
nor  of  the  exterior  devotees,  who  make  all  their 
devotion  consist  in  outward  practices ;  nor  of  the 
presumptuous  devotees,  who,  under  the  pretext 
of  their  false  devotion  to  the  Blessed  Virgin, 
wallow  in  their  sins ;  nor  of  the  inconstant  de- 
votees, who  by  levity  change  their  practices  of 
devotion,  or  throw  them  up  altogether  on  the 
least  temptation;  nor  of  the  Ajpom^icaZ  devotees, 
who  put  themselves  into  confraternities,  and  wear 
the  liveries  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  in  order  to 
pass  for  good  people ;  nor,  finally,  of  the  interested 
devotees,  who  only  have  recourse  to  our  Lady  to 
be  delivered  from  bodily  evils,  or  to  obtain  tem- 
poral goods. 

2.   On  tJie  Characters  of  True  Devotion  to  our 
Blessed  Lady. 
After  having  laid  bare  and  condemned  the 


THE  BLESSED  YIBQIK.  71 

fidse  devotions  to  the  most  holy  Virgin,  we  must, 
in  a  few  words,  characterise  the  true  devotion. 
It  must  be  (1)  interior^  (2)  tender^  (3)  Iwh/y 
(4)  constant^  and  (5)  disinterested, 

1.  True  devotion  to  our  Lady  is  interior; 
that  is  to  say,  it  comes  from  the  spirit  and  the 
heart.  It  flows  from  the  esteem  we  have  of  her, 
the  high  idea  we  have  formed  of  her  great- 
ness, and  the  love  which  we  have  for  her. 

2.  It  is  tender ;  that  is  to  say,  ftill  of  confi- 
dence in  her,  like  a  child's  confidence  in  his 
loving  mother.  This  confidence  makes  the  soul 
have  recourse  to  her  in  all  its  bodily  or  mental 
necessities,  with  much  simplicity,  trust,  and 
tenderness.  It  implores  the  aid  of  its  good 
Mother,  at  all  times,  in  all  places,  and  about  all 
things ;  in  its  doubts,  that  it  may  be  enlightened ; 
in  its  wanderings,  that  it  may  be  brought  into 
ihe  right  path ;  in  its  temptations,  that  it  may 
be  supported ;  in  its  weaknesses,  that  it  may  be 
strengthened ;  in  its  falls,  that  it  may  be  lifted 
up;  in  its  discouragements,  that  it  may  be 
cheered ;  in  its  scruples,  that  they  may  be  taken 
away ;  in  its  crosses,  toils,  and  disappointments 
of  life,  that  it  may  be  consoled  under  them.  In 
a  word,  in  all  its  evils  of  body  and  mind,  the 
soul's  ordinary  reftige  is  in  Mary,  without  fear- 
ing to  be  importunate  to  her  or  to  displease 
Jesus  Christ. 

3.  True  devotion  to  our  Lady  is  holy;  that 


73  TBTHB  DEYOnOH  TO 

is  to  SBjy  it  leads  the  soul  to  avoid  sin,  and  to 
imitate  in  the  Blessed  Virgin  particularly  her 
profound  humility,  her  Uvely  faith,  her  continual 
prayer,  her  universal  mortification,  her  divine 
purity,  her  ardent  charity,  her  heroic  patience, 
her  angelical  sweetness,  and  her  divine  wisdom. 
These  are  the  ten  principal  virtues  of  the  most 
holy  Virgin. 

4.  True  devotion  to  our  Lady  is  constanL 
It  confirms  the  soul  in  good,  and  it  does  not 
let  it  easily  abandon  its  spiritual  exercises.  It 
makes  it  courageous  in  opposing  the  world  in 
its  fashions  and  maxims,  the  flesh  in  its  weari- 
nesses and  passions,  and  the  devil  in  his  temp- 
tations. So  that  a  person  truly  devout  to  our 
Blessed  Lady  is  neither  changeable,  irritable, 
scrupulous,  nor  timid.  It  is  not  that  such  a 
person  does  not  fall,  or  change  sometimes  in  the 
sensible  feeling  of  devotion,  or  in  the  amount 
of  devotion  itsel£  But  when  he  falls,  he  rises 
again  by  stretching  out  his  hand  to  his  good 
Mother.  If  he  loses  the  taste  and  relish  of  de- 
votion, he  does  not  disturb  himself  because  of 
that ;  for  the  just  and  fiuthful  client  of  Mary 
lives  on  the  faith  of  Jesus  and  Mary,  and  not 
on  sentiments  and  sensibiUties. 

5.  Lastly,  true  devotion  to  our  Blessed  Lady 
is  disinterested  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  inspires  the  soul 
not  to  seek  itself  but  God  only,  and  God  in  His 
holy  Mother.     A  true  client  of  Mary  does  not 


THE  BUSSED  YIRGnr.  73 

serve  that  august  Queen  from  a  spirit  of  lucre 
and  interest^  nor  for  its  own  good,  whether 
temporal,  corporal,  or  spiritual ;  but  exclusively 
because  she  merits  to  be  served,  and  Qtod  alone 
in  her.  He  does  not  love  Mary  precisely  be- 
cause she  does  him  good,  or  because  he  hopes 
in  her ;  but  because  she  is  so  worthy  of  love. 
It  is  on  this  account  that  he  loves  and  serves 
her  as  ^dthftdly  in  his  disgusts  and  drynesses, 
as  in  his  sweetnesses  and  sensible  fervours.  He 
loves  her  as  much  on  Calvary,  as  at  the  marriage 
of  Cana.  Oh  I  how  such  a  client  of  our  Blessed 
Lady,  who  has  no  self-seeking  in  his  service  of 
her,  is  agreeable  and  precious  in  the  eyes  of 
God  and  of  His  holy  Mother  1  But  in  these 
days  how  rare  is  such  a  sight  I  It  is  that  it 
may  be  less  rare  that  I  have  taken  my  pen  to 
put  on  paper  what  I  have  taught,  in  pubUo  and 
in  private,  during  my  missions  for  many  years. 

I  have  now  said  many  things  about  the  most 
holy  Virgin ;  but  I  have  many  more  to  say,  and 
there  are  infinitely  more  which  I  shall  omit, 
whether  from  ignorance,  inabihty,  or  want  of 
time,  m  ihe  design  which  I  have  to  form  a  true 
dient  of  Mary,  and  a  true  disciple  of  Jesus 
Ohri^ 

Oh  I  but  my  labour  will  have  been  well  ex- 
pended if  this  little  Writing,  felling  into  the 
hands  of  a  soul  of  good  dispositions,  a  soul  well 
born;— bom  of  God  and  of  Mary,  and  not  of 


112  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

on  the  vows  which  we  have  made  in  holy  Bap- 
tism. It  was  chiefly  by  this  last  reason  that 
he  shut  his  adversaries'  mouths,  making  them 
see  that  this  consecration  to  the  holy  Virgin, 
and  to  Jesus  Christ  by  her  hands,  is  nothing 
else  than  a  perfect  renewal  of  the  vows  and  pro- 
mises of  Baptism.  He  has  said  many  beautifiil 
things  on  this  practice,  which  can  be  read  in  his 
works. 

We  may  also  see  in  M.  Boudon's  book  the 
different  Popes  who  have  approved  this  devotion, 
the  theologians  who  have  examined  it,  the  perse- 
cutions they  have  undergone  and  have  overcome, 
and  the  thousands  of  persons  who  have  embraced 
it,  without  any  Pope  having  ever  condemned 
it.  Indeed,  we  cannot  see  how  it  could  be  con- 
demned without  overturning  the  foundations  of 
Christianiiy.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  this  devotion 
is  not  new ;  and  that  if  it  is  not  common,  it  is 
because  it  is  too  precious  to  be  relished  and 
practised  by  all  the  world.* 

(2)  This  devotion  is  a  secure  means  of  going 
to  Jesus  Christ,  because  it  is  the  very  character- 
istic of  our  Blessed  Lady  to  conduct  us  surely 
to  Jesus,  just  as  it  is  the  very  characteristic  of 
Jesus  to  conduct  us  surely  to  Ihe  Eternal  Father. 
Spiritual  persons,  therefore,  must  not  fall  into 

♦  Boudon  says,  in  his  Saint  Esdavage^  that  the 
English  Catholics  were  remarkable  for  this  devotion 
in  the  seventeenth  century. — F.  W.  F. 


THE  BLESSED  VIROIN. 


75 


tioe.  But  wliat  matter  ?  On  the  contrary,  so 
much  the  better  I  This  very  foresight  encourages 
me,  and  makes  me  hope  for  a  great  success ;  that 
is  to  say,  for  a  great  squadron  of  brave  and  va- 
Hant  soldiers  of  Jesus  and  Mary,  of  both  sexes, 
to  combat  the  world,  the  devil,  and  corrupted 
nature  in  those  more  than  ever  perilous  times 
which  are  about  to  come  I  Qui  legit^  inieUigat. 
Qui  potest  capere^  capiat. 


PAET  11. 

ON  THE  MOST  EXCELLENT  DEVOTION  TO  OUR 
BLESSED  LADY,  OR  THE  PERFECT  CONSE- 
ORATION  TO  JESUS  BY  MARY. 


There  are  several  interior  practices  of  true 
devotion  to  the  Blessed  Virgin.  Here  are  the 
principal  of  them  stated  compendiously.  (1) 
To  honour  her  as  the  worthy  Mother  of  GJod, 
with  the  worship  of  hyperdulia ;  that  is  to  say, 
to  esteem  her  and  honour  her  above  all  the  other 
Saints,  as  the  masterpiece  of  grace,  and  the  first 
after  Jesus  Christ,  true  God  and  true  Man ;  (2) 
to  meditate  her  virtues,  her  privileges,  and  her 
actions ;  (3)  to  contemplate  her  grandeurs ;  (4) 
to  make  to  her  acts  of  love,  of  praise,  of  gratitude ; 
(6)  to  invoke  her  cordially;  (6)  to  offer  our- 
selves to  her,  and  unite  ourselves  with  her ;  (7) 
to  do  all  our  actions  with  the  view  of  pleasing 
lier;  (8)  to  begin,  to  continue,  and  to  finish 
all  our  actions  by  her,  in  her,  and  with  her,  in 
order  that  we  may  do  them  by  Jesus  Christ,  in 
Jesus  Christ,  with  Jesus  Christ,  and  fpr  Jesus 
Ohrist  our  Last  End.  We  will  presently  e^^- 
plain  this  last  practice. 


78  TKDB  DEVOnOK  TO 

Tme  devotion  to  onr  Lady  has  also  several 
exterior  practices,  of  which  the  following  are  the 
chief: — (1)  to  enrol  ourselves  in  her  confrater- 
nities, and  enter  her  congregations ;  (2)  to  join 
the  religious  orders  instituted  in  her  honour ; 
(3)  to  publish  her  praises;  (4)  to  give  alms, 
to  fast,  and  to  undergo  outward  and  inward 
mortifications  in  her  honour ;  (5)  to  wear  her 
hveries,  such  as  the  rosary,  the  scapular,  or  the 
litfle  chain ;  (6)  to  recite  with  attention,  devo- 
tion, and  modesty,  the  holy  Eosary ,  composed  of 
fifteen  decades  of  Hail  Marys  in  honour  of  the 
fift;een  principal  mysteries  of  Jesus  Christ,  or 
five  decades,  which  is  the  third  of  the  Bosary, 
either  in  honour  of  the  five  Joyous  Mysteries, 
which  are  the  Annunciation,  the  Visitation,  the 
Nativity  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Purification,  and 
the  Finding  of  our  Lord  in  the  Temple ;  or  in 
honour  of  the  five  Sorrowful  Mysteries,  which 
are  the  Agony  of  our  Lord  in  the  Grarden  of  Ol- 
ives, His  Scourging,  His  Crowning  with  Thorns^ 
His  Carrying  of  the  Cross,  and  His  Crucifixion ; 
or  in  honour  of  the  five  Glorious  Mysteries, 
which  are  the  Besurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Ascension,  the  Descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  at 
Pentecost,  the  Assumption  of  our  Blessed  Lady 
body  and  soul  into  Heaven,  and  her  Coronaticm 
by  the  Three  Persons  of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity, 
We  may  also  say  a  Chaplet  of  six  or  seven  de- 
cades in  honour  of  the  years  which  we  believe 


THE  BLESSED  YIBGIN.  79 

our  Lady  lived  on  earth ;  or  the  little  Corona  of 
the  Blessed  Virgin,  composed  of  three  Our  Fa- 
thers and  twelve  Hail  Marys,  in  honour  of  her 
crown  of  twelve  stars,  or  privileges;  or  the 
Office  of  our  Lady,  so  universaQy  received  and 
recited  in  the  Church  ;  or  the  Little  Psalter  of  the 
holy  Virgin,  which  St.  Bonaventure  has  com- 
posed in  her  honour,  and  which  is  so  tender  and 
so  devout  that  one  cannot  say  it  without  being 
melted  by  it ;  or  fourteen  Our  Fathers  and  Hail 
Marys  in  honour  of  her  fourteen  joys ;  or  some 
other  prayers,  hymns,  and  canticles  of  the 
Church,  such  as  the  Salve  Regina^  the  Almaj 
the  Ave  Regina  ccehrum^  or  the  Regina  cceli, 
according  to  the  diffisrent  seasons ;  or  the  Ave 
Maris  Stella^  the  0  gloriosa  Domina,  the  Magni- 
ficat, or  some  other  practices  of  devotion  of  which 
books  are  ftJl ;  (7)  to  sing  or  have  sung  spi- 
ritual canticles  in  her  honour ;  (8)  to  make  her 
a  number  of  genuflexions  or  reverences,  while 
saying,  for  example,  every  morning,  sixty  or  a 
hundred  times  Ave  Maria,  Virgojidelis,  to  obtain 
from  God  the  grace  by  her  to  be  faithful  to  the 
graces  of  God  during  the  day ;  and  then  again 
in  the  evening,  Ave  Maria,  Mater  misericordicBy 
to  ask  pardon  of  God  by  her  for  the  sins  that 
we  have  committed  during  the  day ;  (9)  to  take 
care  of  her  confraternities,  to  adorn  her  altars, 
to  crown  and  ornament  her  images;  (10)  to 
carry  her  images,  or  to  have  them  carried,  in 


68  TRUE  DEVOnOK  TO 

crime^  and  assisting  to  crucify  and  outrage  her 
Son,  Who  would  dare  to  think  such  a  ihought 
as  that? 

I  say,  that  thus  to  abuse  devotion  to  our 
Lady,  which,  after  devotion  to  our  Lord  in  the 
Blessed  Sacrament,  is  the  holiest  and  solidest  of 
all  devotions,  is  to  be  guilty  of  a  horrible  sacri- 
lege, which,  after  the  sacrilege  of  an  unworthy 
Communion,  is  the  greatest  and  the  least  pardon- 
able of  all  sacrileges. 

I  confess  that,  in  order  to  be  truly  devout  to 
our  Blessed  Lady,  it  is  not  absolutely  necessary 
to  be  so  holy  as  to  avoid  every  sin,  though  ^tna 
were  to  be  wished;  but  so  much  at  least  is 
necessary,  and  I  beg  you  to  lay  it  well  to 
heart: — 

1.  To  have  a  sincere  resolution  to  avoid,  at 
least,  all  mortal  sin,  which  outrages  the  Moib^r 
as  well  as  the  Son.  2.  I  would  add  abo  that  to 
do  violence  to  ourselves  to  avoid  sin,  to  enrol 
ourselves  in  confraternities,  to  say  the  Bosary  or 
otiber  prayers,  to  fast  on  Saturdays,  and  the  like, 
is  wonderftdly  useftil  to  the  conversion  of  a  sin- 
ner,  however  hardened ;  and  if  my  read^  is  sudi 
a  one,  even  if  he  has  his  foot  in  the  abyss,  I 
would  counsel  these  things  to  him.  Nevertheless 
it  must  be  on  the  condition  that  he  will  only 
practise  these  good  works  with  the  intention  of 
obtaining  from  Grod,  by  the  intercession  of  the 
Blessed  Virgin,  the  grace  of  contrition  and  the 


THE  BUB3SSD  YISaiN.  69 

pardon  of  his  sins,  to  conquer  liis  evil  habits^ 
and  not  to  remain  quietly  in  the  state  of  sin^  in 
spite  of  the  remorse  of  his  conscience,  the  ex- 
ample of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Saints,  and  the 
maxims  of  the  holy  GospeL 

The  inconstant  devotees  are  those  who  are 
devout  to  our  Blessed  Lady  by  intervals  and 
whims.  Sometimes  they  are  fervent  and  some- 
times lukewarm.  Sometimes  they  seem  ready 
to  do  any  thing  for  her,  and  then,  a  little  after- 
wards, they  are  not  like  the  same  people.  They 
begin  by  taking  up  all  the  devotions  to  her,  and 
enrolling  themselves  in  the  confraternities ;  and 
then  they  do  not  practise  the  rules  with  fidelity. 
They  change  like  the  moon;  and  Mary  puts 
them  under  her  feet  with  the  crescent,  because 
they  are  mutable,  and  unworthy  to  be  reckoned 
among  the  servants  of  that  faithftd  Virgin,  whose 
clients  have  for  their  special  graces  fidelity  and 
constancy.  It  were  better  for  such  persons  to 
load  themselves  with  fewer  prayers  and  prac- 
tices, and  to  fiilfil  them  with  faithfulness  and 
love,  in  spite  of  the  world,  the  devil,  and  the 
flesh. 

We  have  still  to  mention  the  &lse  devotees 
to  our  Blessed  Lady,  who  are  the  hypocribioal 
devotees ;  who  doke  their  sins  and  sinM  habits 
und^  her  mantle,  in  order  to  pass  in  the  eyes  of 
men  for  what  they  are  not 

There  are  also  the  interested  devotees,  who 

G 


70  TBUB  DEVOTION  TO 

have  recourse  to  oiir  Lady  only  to  gain  some 
lawsuit,  or  to  avoid  some  danger,  or  to  be  cured 
of  some  illness,  or  for  some  other  similar  ne- 
cessiiy,  without  which  they  would  forget  her 
altogether.  Both,  however,  of  these  two  last 
classes  are  false  devotees,  and  neither  of  them 
pass  current  before  Grod  and  His  holy  Mother. 

Let  us,  then,  take  great  care  not  to  be  of  the 
number  of  the  critical  devotees,  who  believe 
nothing  and  criticise  every  thing ;  nor  of  the 
scrupulous  devotees,  who  are  afraid  of  being  too 
devout  to  our  Lady,  out  of  respect  to  our  Lord ; 
nor  of  the  exterior  devotees,  who  make  all  their 
devotion  consist  in  outward  practices ;  nor  of  the 
presumptuous  devotees,  who,  under  the  pretext 
of  their  false  devotion  to  the  Blessed  Virgin, 
wallow  in  their  sins ;  nor  of  the  inconstant  de* 
votees,  who  by  levity  change  their  practices  of 
devotion,  or  throw  them  up  altogether  on  the 
least  temptation;  nor  of  the  Aj/pom^icaZ  devotees, 
who  put  themselves  into  confraternities,  and  wear 
the  liveries  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  in  order  to 
pass  for  good  people ;  nor,  finally,  of  the  interested 
devotees,  who  only  have  recourse  to  our  Lady  to 
be  dehvered  firom  bodily  evils,  or  to  obtain  tem- 
poral goods, 

2,   On  tlie  Characters  of  True  Devotion  to  our 
Blessed  Lady. 
After  having  laid  bare  and  condemned  the 


THE  BLESSED  VIBOIN.  71 

fiJse  devotions  to  the  most  holy  Virgin,  we  must, 
in  a  few  words,  characterise  the  true  devotion. 
It  must  be  (1)  interior^  (2)  tender^  (3)  Jiolyy 
(4)  constant^  and  (5)  disinterested, 

1.  True  devotion  to  our  Lady  is  interior; 
that  is  to  say,  it  comes  from  the  spirit  and  the 
heart.  It  flows  from  the  esteem  we  have  of  her, 
the  high  idea  we  have  formed  of  her  great- 
ness, and  the  love  which  we  liave  for  her. 

2.  It  is  tender ;  that  is  to  say,  ftdl  of  confi- 
dence in  her,  like  a  child's  confidence  in  his 
loving  mother.  This  confidence  makes  the  soul 
have  recourse  to  her  in  all  its  bodily  or  mental 
necessities,  with  much  simplicity,  trust,  and 
tenderness.  It  implores  the  aid  of  its  good 
Mother,  at  all  times,  in  all  places,  and  about  all 
things ;  in  its  doubts,  that  it  may  be  enlightened ; 
in  its  wanderings,  that  it  may  be  brought  into 
the  right  path ;  in  its  temptations,  that  it  may 
be  supported ;  in  its  weaknesses,  that  it  may  be 
strengthened ;  in  its  falls,  that  it  may  be  lifted 
up;  in  its  discouragements,  that  it  may  be 
cheered ;  in  its  scruples,  that  they  may  be  taken 
away ;  in  its  crosses,  toils,  and  disappointments 
of  Hfe,  that  it  may  be  consoled  under  them.  In 
a  word,  in  all  its  evils  of  body  and  mind,  the 
soul's  ordinary  reftige  is  in  Mary,  without  fear- 
ing to  be  importunate  to  her  or  to  displease 
Jesus  Christ 

3.  True  devotion  to  our  Lady  is  holy;  that 


J3  TRXJB  DETOnOK  TO 

is  to  say,  it  leads  the  soul  to  avoid  sin,  and  to 
imitate  in  the  Blessed  Virgin  particularly  her 
profound  humility ,  her  lively  faith,  her  continnal 
prayer,  her  universal  mortification,  her  divine 
purity,  her  ardent  chariiy,  her  heroic  patience, 
her  angelical  sweetness,  and  her  divine  wisdom. 
These  are  the  ten  principal  virtues  of  the  most 
holy  Virgin. 

4.  True  devotion  to  our  Lady  is  constant 
It  confirms  the  soul  in  good,  and  it  does  not 
let  it  easily  abandon  its  spiritual  exerdses.  It 
makes  it  courageous  in  opposing  the  world  in 
its  fashions  and  maxims,  the  flesh  in  its  weari- 
nesses and  passions,  and  the  devil  in  his  temp- 
tations. So  that  a  person  truly  devout  to  our 
Blessed  Lady  is  neither  changeable,  irritable, 
scrupulous,  nor  timid.  It  is  not  that  such  a 
person  does  not  fall,  or  change  sometimes  in  the 
sensible  feeling  of  devotion,  or  in  the  amount 
of  devotion  itself.  But  when  he  falls,  he  rises 
again  by  stretching  out  his  hand  to  his  good 
Mother.  If  he  loses  the  taste  and  relish  of  de- 
votion, he  does  not  disturb  himself  because  of 
that ;  for  the  just  and  &ithful  client  of  Mary 
lives  on  the  faith  of  Jesus  and  Mary,  and  not 
on  sentiments  and  sensibilities. 

5.  Lastiy,  true  devotion  to  our  Blessed  Lady 
is  disinterested  ;  that  is  to  say,  it  inspires  the  soul 
not  to  seek  itself  but  God  only,  and  God  in  His 
holy  Mother.     A  true  client  of  Maiy  does  not 


THS  BLXBSBD  YIBGIH.  73 

serve  that  august  Queen  from  a  spirit  of  lucre 
and  interest,  nor  for  its  own  good,  whether 
t^nporal,  corporal,  or  spiritual ;  but  exclusively 
because  she  merits  to  be  served,  and  Qtod  alone 
in  her.  He  does  not  love  Mary  precisely  be- 
cause she  does  him  good,  or  because  he  hopes 
in  her ;  but  because  she  is  so  worthy  of  love. 
It  is  on  this  account  that  he  loves  and  serves 
her  as  faithftdly  in  his  disgusts  and  drynesses, 
as  in  his  sweetnesses  and  sensible  fervours.  He 
loves  her  as  much  on  Calvary,  as  at  the  marriage 
of  Cana.  Oh  I  how  such  a  client  of  our  Blessed 
Lady,  who  has  no  self-seeking  in  his  service  of 
her,  is  agreeable  and  precious  in  the  eyes  of 
Ghxi  and  of  His  holy  Mother  I  But  in  these 
days  how  rare  is  sudb  a  sight  I  It  is  that  it 
may  be  less  rare  that  I  have  taken  my  pen  to 
put  on  paper  what  I  have  taught,  in  public  and 
in  private,  during  my  missions  for  many  years. 

I  have  now  said  many  things  about  the  most 
holy  Virgin ;  but  I  have  many  more  to  say,  and 
there  are  infinitely  more  which  I  shall  omit, 
whether  from  ignorance,  inabiUty,  or  want  of 
time,  in  the  design  which  I  have  to  form  a  true 
client  of  Mary,  and  a  true  disciple  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

Oh  1  but  my  labour  will  have  been  well  ex- 
pended if  this  little  Writing,  Ming  into  the 
hands  of  a  soul  of  good  dispositions,  a  soul  well 
bom, — ^bom  of  God  and  of  Mary,  and  not  of 


74  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will 
of  man, — should  unfold  to  him,  and  should,  bythe 
grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  inspire  him  with,  the 
excellence  and  the  price  of  that  true  and  solid 
devotion  to  our  Blessed  Lady,  which  I  am  going 
presently  to  describe.  If  I  knew  that  my  guiliy 
blood  could  serve  in  engraving  upon  any  one's 
heart  the  truths  which  I  am  writing  in  honour 
of  my  true  Mother  and  sovereign  Mistress,  I 
would  use  my  blood  instead  of  ink  to  form  the 
letters,  in  the  hope  to  find  some  good  souls  who, 
by  their  fidelity  to  the  practice  which  I  teach, 
shall  compensate  to  my  dear  Mother  and  Mis- 
tress for  the  losses  which  she  has  suffered 
through  my  ingratitude  and  infideUties.  I  feel 
myself  more  than  ever  animated  to  believe  and 
to  hope  all  which  I  have  had  deeply  engraven 
upon  my  heart,  and  have  asked  of  Grod  these 
many  years,  namely,  that  sooner  or  later  the 
Blessed  Virgin  shall  have  more  children,  ser- 
vants, and  slaves  of  love  than  ever ;  and  that, 
by  this  means,  Jesus  Christ,  my  dear  Master, 
shall  reign  more  in  hearts  than  ever. 

I  clearly  foresee  that  raging  beasts  shall  come 
in  fiiry  to  tear  with  their  diabolical  teeth  this 
little  Writing  and  him  whom  the  Holy  Ghost 
has  made  use  of  to  write  it,  or  at  least  to  smother 
it  in  the  silence  of  a  coffer,  that  it  may  not 
appear.  They  shall  even  attack  and  persecute 
those  who  shall  read  it  and  carry  it  out  in  prac- 


THE  BLESSED  VIBOIK. 


75 


tioe.  But  what  matter  ?  On  the  contrary,  so 
mnch  the  better  I  This  very  foresight  encourages 
me,  and  makes  me  hope  for  a  great  success ;  that 
is  to  say,  for  a  great  squadron  of  brave  and  va- 
liant soldiers  of  Jesus  and  Mary,  of  both  sexes, 
to  combat  the  world,  the  devil,  and  corrupted 
nature  in  those  more  than  ever  perilous  times 
which  are  about  to  come  I  Qui  legit^  intelligat. 
Qui  potest  capere^  capiat. 


12€  TBUS  BKTOTUmr  fO 

tdts  berself  be  overcome  in  love  and  libenfi^ 
As  a  holy  man  said  of  her,  For  an  egg,  she  gives 
an  ox;  that  is  to  say,  for  a  little  that  is  gtveo  <Jo 
her,  the  gives  much  of  what  she  has  received 
from  God.  Hence,  if  a  soul  gives  itself  to  hot 
without  reserve,  she  gives  herself  to  that  sool 
without  reserve,  if  only  we  put  our  eonfidencs 
in  her  without  presumption,  and  labour  on  am 
side  to  acquire  virtues,  and  to  bridle  our  p«8w 
rnxms. 

Let,  then,  the  faithful  servants  of  the  Blessed 
Virgin  say  hardily  with  St  John  Damascene^ 
**  Having  confidence  in  you,  O  Mother  of  Qoi^ 
I  shall  be  saved ;  being  under  your  protectioB,  i 
shall  fear  nothing ;  with  youi;  succour,  I  shall 
give  battle  to  my  enemies,  and  put  them  to  flight ; 
for  devotion  to  you  is  an  arm  c^  salvation,  whidi 
Qod  gives  to  those  whom  it  is  His  will  to  sava** 
i^[>em  titam  habens,  O  Deipara^  servabor ;  deftf^ 
monem  ttuim  possideHSj  rum  timebo ;  persequem 
inimiooe  meos  et  iufngam  vertam^  haiben^  protto^ 
ti&nem  et  auxHimn  tuum  ;  nam  iSn  decotum  esm 
48i  arma  qucBctam  sahitis  qtuB  Deas  his  dot  qmea 
vuU  sahx>8  fieri  (Joan.  Damasc.). 

Of  all  the  truths  which  I  have  be^i  puttbig 
forward  with  regard  to  our  Blessed  Lady  asd 
her  children  and  servants,  the  Holy  Ghost  gives 
us  an  admirable  figure  in  tiie  Scriptures.  It  im 
in  the  history  of  Jacob,  who  received  the  bene* 
diction  of  his  father  Isaac,  by  the  skill  and  p«iaB 


TBS  mjasMD  vmam.  137 


of  &^coa,  his  mother.  This  is  the  histcoy,  aa 
ii»  Holj  Ghost  relates  it  I  will  afterwards  add 
ike  explanati^m  of  it 

Esau  having  sold  Jacob  his  birthri^t,  Be^. 
becca,  the  mother  of  the  two  brothers,  who  loved 
Jhoob  tenderly,  secured  this  advantage  to  him 
BMOiy  years  afterwards-  by  an  address  most  holy 
fent  mostftillof  mystery.  Isaac,  feeling  himself 
wry  cidy  and  wishing  to  bless  his  children  before 
he  died,  called  his  son  Esau,  who  was  his  favour- 
ite, and  commancbd  him  to  go  out  hunting,  to 
get  him  something  to  eat,  in  order  tliat  he  mighit 
Idesa  him  afterwards.  Sebeeea  promptiy  iuf- 
formed  Jacob  of  what  had  passed,  aitd  ordered 
}mn  to  go  and  take  two  kids  firom  the  flook. 
When  he  had  given  them  to  his  modier,  she  pre^ 
pored  for  Isaac  what  she  knew  he  liked.  She 
dothed  Jacob  in  the  garments  of  Esau,  which 
Ae  kept,  and  covered  his  hands  and  his  neok 
irkh  the  skin  of  the  kids,  so  that  his  father,  who 
WAS  blind,  might,  in  hearing  Jacob's  voice,  think 
«t  least  by  the  i^in  of  his  hands  that  it  was 
&au  his  brother.  Isaac,  having  been  surprised 
by  the  voice,  which  he  thought  was  Jacob's 
foice,  made  him  come  near  him.  Having  touched 
file  skins  with  which  his  hands  were  covered,  ha 
WBoA  that  the  voice  truly  was  the  voice  of  Jacob, 
but  tiiat  the  hands  were  the  hands  of  Esan. 
After  he  had  eaten,  and,  in  kissing  Jacob,  had 
nnelt  the  odour  of  his  perfttmed  garm^its^  he 


128  TBUS  DBVOTIOK  TO 

blessed  him,  and  wished  for  him  the  dew  ofi 
heaven  and  the  fiiiitfidness  of  eartL  He  made 
him  lord  over  all  his  brethren,  and  finished  his 
blessing  with  these  words,  "  Cursed  be  he  thafc 
curseth  thee,  and  let  him  that  blesseth  thee  btf 
filled  with  blessings,"  Isaac  had  hardly  finished 
these  words  when  Esau  entered,  and  brought  with 
him  what  he  had  captured  while  out  hunting,  id 
order  that  his  father  might  eat  it,  and  then  bless 
him.  The  holy  patriarch  was  surprised  with  an 
incredible  astonishment  when  he  imderstood 
what  had  happened.  But,  far  fi'om  retracting 
what  he  had  done,  on  the  contrary  he  confirmed 
it,  for  he  saw  too  plainly  that  the  finger  of  Gtod 
was  in  the  matter.  Esau  then  uttered  great 
cries,  as  the  holy  Scripture  remarks,  and  loudly 
accusing  the  deceitfulness  of  his  brother,  he  asked 
his  father  if  he  had  but  one  benediction;  being 
in  this  point,  as  the  holy  Fathers  remark,  the 
image  of  those  who  are  too  glad  to  ally  God 
with  the  world,  and  are  fain  to  enjoy  the  con- 
solations of  heaven  and  the  consolations  of  earth 
both  together.  At  last  Isaac,  touched  with  the 
cries  of  Esau,  blessed  him,  but  with  a  blessii^ 
of  the  eartli,  subjecting  him  to  his  brother.  This* 
made  him  conceive  such  an  envenomed  hatred 
to  Jacob,  that  he  waited  only  for  }ns  fatherV 
death,  in  order  to  kill  him.  Neither  would: 
Jacob  have  escaped  death,  if  his  dear  mother 
Bebecca  had  not  saved  him  from  it  by  her  in** 


THE  BLESSED  VIBGIK.  129 

dostries,  and  by  the  good  counsels  which  she 
gave  him,  and  which  he  followed. 

Before  explaining  this  beautiAil  history,  we 
must  observe  that,  according  to  the  holy  Fathers 
and  the  interpreters  of  Scripture,  Jacob  is  the 
figure  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  predestinate,  and 
Esau  that  of  the  reprobate.  We  have  but  got 
to  examine  the  actions  and  conduct  of  the  one 
and  the  other  to  form  our  judgment  about  this. 

1.  Esau,  the  elder,  was  strong  and  robust 
of  body,  adroit  and  skilfiil  in  drawing  the  bow, 
and  in  taking  much  game  in  the  chase.  2.  He 
hardly  ever  stayed  in  the  house;  and  putting  no 
confidence  in  any  thing  but  his  own  strength 
and  address,  he  only  worked  out  of  doors.  3. 
He  took  very  little  pains  to  please  his  mother 
Bebecca,  and  indeed  did  nothing  for  that  end. 
4.  He  was  such  a  glutton,  and  loved  eating  so 
much,  that  he  sold  his  birthright  for  a  mess  of 
pottage.  5.  He  was,  like  Cain,  fiill  of  envy 
agunst  his  brother  Jacob,  and  persecuted  him 
beyond  measure. 

Now  this  is  the  daily  conduct  of  the  repro- 
bate. 1.  They  trust  in  their  own  strength  and 
afytitude  for  temporal  afiairs.  They  are  very 
strong,  very  able,  and  very  enlightened  in 
earthly  business ;  but  very  weak  and  very  igno- 
taut  in  heavenly  things, — In  terrenia  fortes^  in 
ecelestibus  debiles.  2.  It  is  on  this  account  that 
tiiey  are  hardly  at  all,  or  at  least  very  little,  at 


130  TRUE  T>EVt)WOS  TO 

their  own  bomes^ — thsA  is  to  say,  m  tt^ir  owM 
interior,  which  is  ihe  inward  and  essential  bousi 
which  God  has  given  to  every  man,  to  live  theife 
9£b&r  His  example ;  for  Gt>d  always  rests  in  Him** 
edf.  The  reprobate  do  not  love  retirement,  nor 
spiritnality,  nor  inward  devotion ;  and  they  tredl 
as  little,  or  as  bigots,  or  as  savages,  those  who 
are  interior  or  retired  from  the  world,  and  wbir 
work  more  within  than  without  3.  TherqpOTH 
bate  care  next  to  no&ing  tat  devotion  to  otu^ 
Blessed  Lady,  the  Mother  of  the  predestinate 
It  is  true  that  ibey  do  not  bate  her  formal!;^ 
Indeed,  they  sometimes  praise  her,  and  say  tiiey 
love  her,  and  even  practise  some  devotion  in  hei^ 
honour.  Nevertheless  they  cannot  bear  that  w« 
should  love  her  tenderly,  because  they  have  boI 
ihe  tendernesses  of  Jacob  fear  her.  They  &rf 
much  to  say  again^  the  practices  of  devotion,  ^ 
which  her  good  children  and  servants  &ithfi]lfy 
employ  themselves  in  order  to  gain  her  affectiiH^' 
because  they  do  not  think  that  devotion  neooB* 
sary  to  salvation ;  and  they  consid^,  that  pre^' 
vided  they  do  not  hate  our  Lady  formally,  ch^ 
openly  despise  her  devotion,  it  is  enough.  Mosl^ 
over,  ^y  imagine  that  they  are  already  in  her 
good  graces,  and  that,  in  fine,  they  are  her  ser*' 
vants,  inasmuch  as  they  recite  and  mmnble  eer^ 
tain  prayers  in  her  honour,  withcmt  tendemMjj 
for  her,  or  amendment  in  themselves.  4.  Tlie 
reprobate  jsell  their  birthisght ;  that  is  to  8ay^ 


TKS  llJifligl  YIBQitf.  181 


iim  {ddasares  of  paradise.  They  sell  it  for  a 
pottage  of  lentils ;  that  is  to  say,  for  the  pleasures 
of  the  earth.  They  laugh,  they  drink,  they  eat, 
tJmy  amuse  themselves,  they  gamble,  they  dancei 
nod  take  no  more  pains  than  Esau  did  to  render 
^imiselves  worthy  of  the  benediction  of  their 
Qeavenly  Father.  In  a  word,  they  think  only 
of  earth,  and  they  love  earth  only ;  and  they 
qpeak  and  act  only  for  earth  and  for  its  pleasures, 
a^Uing  for  one  moment  of  enjoyment,  for  one 
^mB  puff  of  honour,  and  for  a  morsd  of  hard 
o»6tal,  yellow  or  white,  their  baptismal  gracOi 
Hkeir  robe  of  innocence,  and  their  heavenly  in- 
Wstitanoe.  5.  Finally,  the  reprobate  daily  hate 
aad  persecute  the  predestinate  openly  and  se- 
foatly.  They  feel  the  predestinate  as  a  burden 
^  &em,  they  despise  them,  they  criticise  them, 
tibey  counterwork  them,  they  abuse  them,  thc^ 
i^idk  them,  they  cheat  them,  they  impoverish  themi 
i&ey  drive  them  away,  they  bring  them  low  into 
ili^doBt ;  while  they  themselves  are  making  for- 
tooes,  are  taking  their  pleasures,  getting  them* 
sf^ves  into  good  positions,  enriching  themselves, 
ajfgprandishig  themselves,  and  living  at  their  ease. 
'*'  As  to  Jacob,  the  younger;  1.  He  was  of 
ai&eUe  ocmstitution,  meek  and  peaceful.  He 
Hmd  for  the  most  part  at  home,  in  order  to 
ffm  ihe  good  graces  of  his  mother  Bebeccai 
wiiom  he  loved  tenderly.  If  he  went  abroad| 
i^  was  not  of  bis  own  will,  nor  through  any 


132  TRUE  DEYOnOH  TO 

confidence  in  his  own  industry,  but  to  obey  bis 
mother. 

2.  He  loved  and  honoured  his  mother.  It 
was  on  this  accoimt  that  he  kept  at  home.  He 
avoided  every  thing  which  could  displease  her, 
and  did  every  thing  which  he  thought  would 
please  her;  and  this  increased  the  love  whioh 
Bebecca  already  had  for  him. 

3.  He  was  subject  in  all  things  to  his  dear 
mother.  He  obeyed  her  entirely  in  all  matters, 
— ^promptly,  without  delaying,  and  lovingly, 
without  complaining.  At  the  least  token  of 
her  will,  the  little  Jacob  ran  and  worked ;  and 
he  believed  every  thing  she  said  to  him.  For 
example:  when  she  told  him  to  fetch  two  kids, 
and  that  he  should  fetch  them  in  order  that  she 
should  prepare  something  for  his  father  Isaac 
to  eat,  Jacob  did  not  reply  that  one  was  enough 
to  make  a  dish  for  a  single  man,  but  without 
reasoning  he  did  what  she  told  him  to  do. 

4.  He  had  a  great  confidence  in  his  dear  mo^ 
ther.  As  he  did  not  lean  in  the  least  on  his  o^^ 
ability,  he  leant  exclusively  on  the  care  and  pro«- 
tection  of  his  mother.  He  appealed  to  her  in  aH 
his  necessities,  and  consulted  her  in  all  his  doubti. 
For  example :  when  he  asked  if  instead  of  a  blesfti- 
ing,  he  should  not  receive  a  curse  from  his  fathec, 
he  believed  her  and  trusted  her,  when  she  said 
that  she  would  take  the  curse  upon  herself. 

5    Lastly,  he  imitated  as  far  as  he  could  the 


THE  BLMSBSD  YEBGOK.  133 

virtues  he  saw  in  his  moiher.  It  seems  as  if 
one  of  his  reasons  for  leading  suoh  a  sedentary 
life  at  home  was  to  imitate  his  dear  mother, 
who  was  virtuous,  and  kept  herself  removed 
from  bad  companies,  which  corrupt  the  morals. 
By  this  means  he  made  himself  worthy  to  re- 
o^ve  the  double  benediction  of  his  beloved  father. 

Such  also  is  the  conduct  which  the  predes- 
tinate daily  observe. 

1.  They  are  sedentary^  and  home  •  keepers, 
with  their  Mother.  In  other  words,  they  love 
retirement,  and  are  interior.  They  give  them- 
selves to  prayer;  but  it  is  after  the  example 
and  in  the  company  of  their  Mother  the  holy 
Virgin,  the  whole  of  whose  glory  is  within,  and 
who,  during  her  whole  life,  so  much  loved  retire^ 
ment  and  prayer.  It  is  true  that  they  sometimes 
sippeax  without,  in  the  world ;  but  it  is  in  obedi- 
ence to  the  will  of  God,  and  that  of  their  dear 
Mother,  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  their  state.  How- 
ever apparently  important  their  outward  works 
ipay  be,  they  esteem  still  more  highly  those 
which  they  do  within  themselves,  in  their  in- 
ierioTj  in  the  company  of  the  Blessed  Virgin. 
For  it  is  within  that  tibey  accomplish  the  great 
woark  of  their  perfection,  compared  with  which 
all  their  other  works  are  but  infant  sports.  It 
jft  on  this  account  that,  while  sometimes  their 
brothers  and  sisters  are  working  outwardly  with 
much  energy,  success,  and  skill,  in  the  praise 

L 


134  TBUE  DEVOTION  TO 

and  with  the  approbation  of  the  world,  thqr, 
on  the  contrary,  know  by  the  light  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  that  there  is  far  more  glory,  more  good, 
and  more  pleasure,  in  remaining  hidden  in  re* 
treat  with  Jesus  Christ  their  Model,  in  an 
entire  and  perfect  subjection  to  their  Mother^ 
than  to  do  of  themselves  wonders  of  nature  and 
grace  in  the  world,  as  so  many  Esaus  and  re- 
probates do.  Gloria  et  diviiioB  in  domo  eptSy-^ 
"  Glory  for  G^  and  riches  for  men  are  to  be 
found  in  the  house  of  Mary." 

Lord  Jesus,  how  sweet  are  Thy  tabernacles  I 
The  sparrow  has  found  a  house  to  lodge  in,  and 
the  turtle-dove  a  nest  for  her  little  ones.  Oh, 
happy  is  the  man  who  dwells  in  the  house  of 
Mary,  where  Thou  wert  the  first  to  make  Thy 
dwelling !  It  is  in  this  house  of  the  predestinate 
that  he  receives  succour  jGrom  Thee  alone,  and 
that  he  has  disposed  the  steps  and  ascents  of  aU 
the  virtues,  to  raise  himself  in  his  heart  to  per- 
fection in  this  vale  of  tears.  Quam  dilecta  taber^ 
nacula  tua  ! 

2.  The  predestinate  tenderly  love  and  truly 
honour  our  Blessed  Lady  as  their  good  Mother 
and  Mistress.  They  love  her  not  only  by  month, 
but  in  trutL  They  honour  her  not  only  out* 
wardly ,  but  in  the  bottom  of  their  hearts.  They 
avoid,  like  Jacob,  every  thing  which  can  dis«r 
please  her ;  and  they  practise  with  fervour  what- 
ever they  think  will  make  them  find  favour  with 


THE  BLEBSED  VIRGIK.  135 

betr.  They  bring  to  her,  and  give  her,  not  two 
Mds,  as  Jacob  did  to  Bebeoca,  but  their  body 
and  their  soul,  with  all  that  depends  on  them, 
figured  by  the  two  kids  of  Jacob.  They  bring 
them  to  her,  (1)  that  she  may  receive  them  as 
thmgs  which  belong  to  her ;  (2)  that  she  may 
kill  them,  and  make  them  die  to  sin  and  self,  in 
stripping  them  of  their  own  skin,  and  their  own 
self-love,  and  by  this  means  to  please  Jesus  her 
Son,  who  wills  not  to  have  any  for  His  disciples 
and  firiends  but  those  who  are  dead  to  them- 
selves ;  (3)  that  she  may  prepare  them  for  the 
taste  of  our  Heavenly  Father,  and  for  His  great- 
est glory,  which  she  knows  better  than  any  other 
creature ;  and  (4)  that  by  her  cares  and  inter- 
cessions this  body  and  soul,  thoroughly  purified 
from  every  stain,  thoroughly  dead,  thoroughly 
stripped,  and  well  prepared,  may  be  a  delicate 
meat,  worthy  of  the  moutii  and  the  blessing 
of  our  Heavenly  Father.  Is  not  this  what  the 
predestinate  do,  who  relish  and  practise  the  per- 
fect consecration  to  Jesus  Christ  by  the  hands 
of  Mary,  which  we  are  now  teaching  them,  by 
v^y  of  testifying  to  Jesus  and  Mary  an  efiective 
stfui  courageous  love? 

The  reprobate  tell  us  loudly  enough  that 
they  love  Jesus,  and  that  they  love  and  honour 
Mary;  but  it  is  not  with  their  substance,  it  is 
not  up  to  the  point  of  sacrificing  to  them  their 
body  witii  its  senses,  their  soul  with  its  passions, 


136  TBUE  DBYOnOK  TO 

as  the  predestinate  do.  These  last  are  subject  and 
obedient  to  our  Blessed  Lady^  as  to  their  good 
Mother;  after  the  example  of  Jesus  Christ,  who^ 
of  the  three-and-thirty  years  He  lived  on  earib> 
employed  thirty  to  glorify  God  His  Father,  by  a 
perfect  and  entire  subjection  to  His  holy  Mother; 

3.  The  predestinate  obey  Mary  in  following 
exactiy  her  counsels,  as  the  littie  Jacob  did  those 
of  Bebecca,  who  said  to  him,  Acquiesce  cansUiis 
meisj — "  My  son,  follow  my  coimsels ;"  or  like 
the  people  at  the  marriage  of  Cana,  to  whom  our 
Lady  said,  Quodcumque  dixerit  vobisj  facHiej-^r 
"  Whatever  my  Son  shall  say  to  you,  that  do," 
Jacob,  for  having  obeyed  his  mother,  received 
the  blessing,  as  it  were,  miraculously,  although 
naturally  he  would  not  have  had  it.  The  people 
at  the  marriage  of  Cana,  for  having  followed  our 
Lady's  counsel,  were  honoured  with  our  Lord's 
first  miracle,  who  there  changed  the  water  inie 
wine  at  the  prayer  of  His  holy  Mother.  La  like 
manner,  all  those  who,  to  the  end  of  time,  shaU 
receive  the  benediction  of  our  Heavenly  Father, 
and  shall  be  honoured  by  the  wonders  of  Go^ 
shall  only  receive  their  graces  in  consequence  4rf 
their  perfect  obedience  to  Mary-  The  Esaus,  xa 
the  contrary^  lose  their  blessing  through  their 
want  of  subjection  to  the  Blessed  Virgin. 

4.  The  predestina,te  have  also  a  great  confix 
denoe  in.the  .goodness  and  power  of  our  Blessed 
Lady,  their  good  Moither^  They  call  incessanfly 


THE  BLI!SSEI)  VIRGDT.  137 

fia*  her  help.  They  look  upon  her  as  their  polar 
tetar,  to  lead  them  to  a  good  port.  They  lay 
bare  to  her  their  pains  and  their  necessities  with 
much  openness  of  heart  They  attach  themselves 
to  her  mercy  and  her  sweetness,  in  order  to  get 
tiie  pardon  of  their  sins  by  her  intercession,  or 
to  taste  her  maternal  sweetnesses  in  their  pains 
9md  wearinesses. 

They  even  throw  themselves,  hide  themselves, 
and  lose  themselves  in  an  admirable  manner  in 
b^  loving  and  virginal  bosom,  that  they  may  be 
9ei  on  fire  there  of  pure  love,  that  they  may  be 
cleansed  there  fix)m  their  least  stain,  and  fully  to 
£nd  Jesus,  who  dwells  there,  as  on  His  most 
glorious  throne.  0  what  happiness  I  "Think 
not,"  says  the  Abbot  Gueric,  "that  it  is  happier 
to  dwell  in  Abraham's  bosom  than  in  Mary's  i 
for  it  is  in  this  last  that  our  Lord  has  placed  His 
Ihrone,"  —  Ife  credideris  majoris  esse  felidtatis 
habitare  in  sinu  Abrahce  quam  in  sinu  MaricBj  ciim 
w»  eo  Dominits  posuerit  ihronum  suum. 

The  reprobate,  on  the  contrary,  putting  all 
.&eir  trust  in  themselves,  only  eat  with  the  pro- 
idigal  what  the  swine  eat.  They  eat  earth  hke 
tile  toads,  and,  like  the  children  of  the  world, 
'^ey  love  only  visible  and  external  things.  They 
have  no  relish  for  the  sweetnesses  of  Mary's 
bosom.  They  have  not  that  feeling  of  a  cer- 
jtoin  resting-place,  and  a  sure  confidence,  which 
tiie  predestinate  feel  in  the  holy  Virgin,  their 


138  TBUB  DEYOnOK  TO 

good  Mother.  They  are  miserably  attached  to 
their  outward  hunger,  as  St  Gregory  says,  and 
make  not  so  much  as  a  pretence  of  having  acgr 
taste  for  the  sweetness  which  is  prepared  withki 
themselves,  and  within  Jesus  and  Mary. 

5.  Lastly,  the  predestinate  keep  the  ways  of 
our  Blessed  Lady,  their  good  Mother;  that  is  to 
say,  they  imitate  her.  It  is  in  this  point  that 
they  are  truly  happy  and  truly  devout,  and  carry 
more  especially  tibe  mark  of  their  predestination* 
This  good  Mother  says  to  them,  Beati  qui  cusUh- 
diuntviasmeas;  that  is  to  say,  "  Blessed  are  they 
who  practise  my  virtues,  and  with  the  help  of 
divine  grace  walk  in  the  footsteps  of  my  life. 
During  life  they  are  happy  in  this  world,  through 
the  abundance  of  graces  and  sweetnesses  which 
I  impart  to  them  from  my  fulness,  and  more 
abundantly  than  to  others,  who  do  not  imitate 
me  so  closely.  They  are  happy  in  their  death, 
which  is  mUd  and  tranquil,  and  at  which  I  am 
ordinarily  present  myself,  that  I  myself  may 
conduct  them  to  the  joys  of  eternity ;  and,  lastly, 
they  shall  be  happy  in  eternity ;  for  never  luis 
any  one  of  my  good  servants  been  lost,  who  imi- 
tated my  virtues  during  Hfe." 

The  reprobate,  on  the  contrary,  are  unhappy 
during  their  life,  at  their  death,  andforetemUgr, 
because  they  do  not  imitate  our  Lady  in  her  vir- 
tues, but  content  themselves  with  sometimes  be- 
ing enrolled  in  her  confraternities,  reciting  some 


THE  BLESSED  VIBOnr.  139 

prayers  in  her  honour,  or  going  through  some 
other  exterior  devotion.  0  holy  Virgin,  my 
good  Mother,  how  happy  are  those  (I  repeat  it 
with  the  transports  of  my  heart), — ^how  happy 
are  those  who,  not  letting  themselyes  be  seduced 
by  a  false  devotion  towards  you,  faithfully  keep 
your  ways,  your  counsels,  and  your  orders  I 
But  how  unhappy  ajid  accursed  are  those  who 
nboae  your  devotion,  and  keep  not  the  command- 
ments of  your  Son, — Maledicti  crmiea  qui  decli" 
nant  a  mandatis  tuis  I 

Let  us  now  turn  to  look  at  the  charitable 
duties  which  our  Blessed  Lady,  as  the  best  of  all 
Mothers,  ftdfils  for  the  &ithfiil  servants  who  have 
given  themselves  to  her  after  the  manner  I  have 
described,  and  according  to  the  figure  of  Jacob. 

L  She  loves  them :  Ego  diligentea  me  diligoj — 
**  I  love  those  who  love  me."  She  loves  them 
(1)  because  she  is  their  true  Mother;  and  a  mo- 
tiier  loves  her  child,  the  fruit  of  her  entrails ;  (2) 
she  loves  them  out  of  gratitude,  because  they 
.  effectively  love  her  as  their  good  Mother ;  (3)  she 
loves  them  because,  being  predestinate,  God  loves 
-ihem, — Jacob  diieaiy  JEsau  aiUem  odio  hdbui; 
(4)  she  loves  them  because  they  are  all  conse- 
erated  to  her,  and  are  her  possession  and  her 
.  inheritance, — In  Israel  hcereditare. 

She  loves  them  tenderly,  and  more  tenderly 
than  all  other  mothers  put  together.  Throw,  if 
yon  can,  all  the  natural  love  which  all  the  mothers 


140  TEUB  DBVonoir  to 

of  the  world  have  for  their  children,  into  the  ooff 
heart  of  one  mother  for  one  only  child.  Sordy 
that  mother  will  love  that  child  immensely,^ 
Nevertheless  it  is  true  that  Mary  loves  her  chil** 
dren  yet  more  tenderly  than  that  mother  would 
love  that  child  of  hers. 

She  does  not  love  them  only  with  affection, 
but  with  efficacy.  Her  love  for  them  is  aetivQ 
and  effective,  equal  to  that  of  Bebecca  for  Jacob, 
and  fer  beyond  it. 

See  what  this  good  Mother,  of  whom  Be- 
becca was  but  the  type,  does  to  obtain  for  her 
children  the  blessing  of  our  Heavenly  Father. 

1.  She  is  on  the  look-out,  as  Bebecca  was, 
for  favourable  occasions  to  do  them  good,  to 
aggrandise  and  enrich  them.  She  sees  clearly 
in  Gtod  all  goods  and  evils,  all  prosperous  and 
adverse  fortunes,  the  blessings  'and  the  cursings 
of  God ;  and  then  she  so  disposes  things  from 
afar,  that  she  may  exempt  her  servants  from  aD 
sorts  of  evils,  and  heap  upon  them  all  sorts  of 
goods ;  so  that  if  there  is  a  good  fortune  to  make 
in  God  by  the  fidelity  of  a  creature  to  any  high 
employment,  it  is  certain  that  Mary  will  pro-t 
cure  that  good  fortune  for  some  of  her  true  chil- 
dren and  servants,  and  will  give  them  the  grace 
to  go  through  it  with  fideliiy.  It  is  a  Saint  who 
says.  Ipsa  procurat  negotia  Tbostrtu 

2.  She  also  gives  her  clients  good  counsels,  as 
Bebecca  did  to  Jacob,  FUi  mij  acquiesce  consiliig^ 


THE  BLESSED  YIBQIN.  141 

BW^ — *^  My  son,  follow  my  counsels."  Among 
odier  comisels,  she  inspires  them  to  bring  her 
the  two  kids ;  that  is  to  say,  their  body  and  soul, 
in  order  to  consecrate  them,  to  make  a  pottage 
agreeable  to  Qod,  and  to  do  every  thing  which 
Jesus  Christ  her  Son  has  taught  by  His  words 
and  His  examples.  K  it  is  not  by  herself  that  she 
gives  these  counsels,  it  is  by  the  ministry  of  the 
Angels,  who  have  no  greater  honour  or  pleasure 
than  to  descend  to  earth  to  obey  any  of  her  com- 
mandments, and  to  succour  any  of  her  servants. 
3.  When  they  have  brought  to  her  and  con- 
secrated to  her  their  body  and  soul,  and  all  that 
depends  on  them,  without  excepting  any  thing, 
what  does  that  good  Mother  do?  Just  what 
Rebecca  did  of  old  with  the  two  kids  Jacob 
brought  her.  (1)  She  kills  them,  and  makes 
them  die  to  the  old  Adam.  (2)  She  flays,  and 
strips  them  of  their  natural  skin,  their  natural 
inclinations,  self-love,  their  own  will,  and  all 
attachment  to  creatures.  (3)  She  cleanses  them 
of  their  spots,  their  vilenesses,  and  their  sins* 
(4)  She  dresses  them  to  the  taste  of  God,  and 
to  His  greatest  glory;  and  as  it  is  Mary  alone 
who  knows  perfectly  what  that  divine  taste  is, 
and  what  that  greatest  glory  of  the  Most  High, 
it  is  Mary  alone  who,  without  making  any  mis- 
take, can  accommodate  and  dress  our  body  and 
soul  for  that  taste  infinitely  exalted,  and  for  that 
glory,  infinitely  hidden. 


142  TBUB  DEVOTION  TO 

4.  This  good  Mother,  having  received  the 
perfect  oflFering  which  we  make  to  her  of  oms 
selves,  our  own  merits  and  satisfactions,  by  the 
devotion  I  am  describing,  strips  us  of  our  old 
garments ;  she  makes  us  her  own,  and  so  makes 
us  worthy  to  appear  before  our  heavenly  Faih^. 

(1)  She  clothes  us  in  the  clean,  new,  pre- 
cious, and  perfomed  garments  of  Esau  the  elder, 
—that  is,  of  Jesus  Christ  her  Son, — ^whom  she 
keeps  in  her  house, — ^that  is  to  say,  whom  she  has 
in  her  own  power.  She  is  the  treasurer  and  eter- 
nal dispenser  of  the  merits  and  virtues  of  her  Son, 
which  she  gives  and  communicates  to  whom  she 
wills,  when  she  wills,  as  she  wills,  and  in  such 
quantiiy  as  she  wills ;  as  we  have  seen  before. 

(2)  She  covers  the  neck  and  hands  of  her 
servants  with  the  skins  of  the  kids  she  Mlled; 
that  is  to  say,  she  adorns  them  with  the  merits 
and  value  of  her  own  proper  actions.  She  kills 
and  mortifies,  it  is  true,  all  that  is  impure  and 
imperfect  in  them,  but  she  neither  loses  nor  dis- 
sipates one  atom  of  the  good  which  grace  has 
done  there.  On  the  contrary,  she  preserves  and 
augments  it,  to  make  it  the  ornament  and  the 
strength  of  their  neck  and  their  hands;  thai 
is  to  say,  to  fortify  them,  and  to  help  them  to 
carry  the  yoke  of  tiie  Lord,  which  is  worn  upon 
the  neck,  and  to  work  great  things  for  the  glory 
of  Qt)d,  and  the  salvation  of  their  poor  brethren. 

(3)  She  bestows  a  new  perfume  and  a  new 


THE  BI1E88BD  YIBOIK.  143 

grace  upon  their  garmentB  and  adommentB^  in 
eommunioating  to  them  her  own  garments, 
nerits,  and  virtues,  which  she  bequeathed  to 
them  by  her  testament,  when  she  died ;  as  said 
a  holy  religious  of  the  last  century,  who  died  in 
the  odour  of  sanetiiy,  and  learnt  this  by  revela- 
tion. Thus  all  her  domestics,  faith&l  servants 
and  slaves,  are  doubly  clad  in  the  garments  of 
her  Son  and  in  her  own, —  Omnea  domestici 
vestiti  sunt  dvplicibua.  It  is  on  this  account 
that  they  have  nothing  to  fear  from  the  cold  of 
Jesus  Christ,  who  is  white  as  snow, — a  cold 
which  the  reprobate,  all  naked,  and  stripped  of 
the  merits  of  Jesus  and  Mary,  cannot  for  one 
moment  bear. 

(4)  Finally,  she  enables  them  to  obtain  the 
blessing  of  our  Heavenly  Father,  though,  being 
but  the  youngest  bom  and  indeed  only  adopted 
children,  they  have  no  natural  right  to  have  it. 
With  these  garments  all  new,  most  precious, 
and  of  most  fragrant  odour,  and  with  their  body 
and  soul  well  prepared  and  dressed,  they  draw 
near  with  confidence  to  the  Father's  bed  of  re- 
pose. He  understands  and  distinguishes  their 
voice,  which  is  the  voice  of  the  sinner;  He 
touches  their  hands,  covered  with  skins;  He 
smells  the  good  odour  of  their  clothes ;  He  eats 
with  joy  of  that  which  Mary  their  Mother  has 
dressed  for  Him,  recognising  in  them  the  merits 
and  the  good  odour  of  His  Son  and  of  His  holy 


144  TBXJB  DEVOTION  TO 

Mother.  1.  First,  then,  He  gives  them  His 
double  benediction,  the  benediction  of  the  dew 
of  Heaven,  De  rore  coelestij — ^that  is  to  say,  of 
divine  grace,  which  is  the  seed  of  glory ;  Bene^ 
diant  nos  in  omni  benedictione  spiritali  in  Chrikto 
Jesu  ;  and  then  the  benediction  of  the  fat  of  the 
earth,  De  pinguedine  terrcBj — ^that  is  to  say,  tlie 
good  Father  gives  them  their  daily  bread,  and 
a  sufficient  abundance  of  the  goods  of  this  world; 
2.  Secondly,  He  makes  them  masters  of  their 
other  brethren,  the  reprobate.  But  this  primacy 
is  not  always  apparent  in  the  world,  which  passes 
in  an  instant,  and  where  the  reprobate  are  often 
masters, — Peccatores  effcibuntur  et  gloriolbuntur  ; 
vidi  impium  supereaaltatum  et  elevatum.  But  it 
is  nevertheless  a  true  primacy;  and  it  will 
appear  manifestly  in  the  other  world  for  all 
eternity,  where  the  just,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  says, 
shall  reign  over  the  nations,  and  command  them, 
— Dondnabuntur  populis.  3,  Thirdly,  His  Ma- 
jesiy,  not  content  with  blessing  them  in  their 
persons  and  their  goods,  blesses  also  those  who 
«hall  bless  them,  and  curses  those  who  shall 
curse  and  persecute  them. 

n.  The  second  duly  which  our  Blessed  Lady 
ftdfils  towards  her  faithful  servants  is,  that  shd 
furnishes  them  with  every  thing,  both  for  their 
body  and  their  soul.  She  gives  them  double 
clothing,  as  we  have  just  seen.  She  gives  than 
to  eat  the  most  exquisite  meats  of  the  table  of 


THI  BLISBBD  VIBQIlf.  145 

€kld;  for  she  gives  them  to  eat  the  bread  of 
Itfe,  which  she  herself  has  formed,  A  genera^ 
tionibm  meis  impleminij — My  dear  children,  she 
says,  under  the  name  of  divine  Wisdom,  be  filled 
with  my  generations ;  that  is  to  say,  with  Jesos, 
the  fruit  of  life,  whom  I  have  brought  into  the 
world  for  you.  Venitey  comedite  panem  meum  et 
hibite  xmum  quod  miscui  vdbis;  comedite^  et  bSritey 
et  inebriaminiy  carissimiy — Come,  she  repeats  to 
&em  in  another  place,  eat  my  bread,  which  is 
Jesus,  and  drink  the  wine  of  His  love,  which  I 
have  mixed  for  jon.  As  it  is  Maiy  who  is  the 
treasurer  and  dispenser  of  the  gifts  and  graces 
of  the  Most  High,  she  gives  a  good  portion,  and 
indeed  the  best  portion,  to  nourish  and  maintain 
her  children  and  her  servants.  They  are  fattened 
cm  the  Living  Bread.  They  are  inebriated  on 
the  wine  which  brings  forth  virgins.  They  are 
borne  at  the  bosom  of  Mary, — Ad  vbera  porta^ 
KmvnL  They  have  such  fecility  in  carrying  the 
yoke  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  they  feel  nothing  of 
its  weight,  because  of  the  oil  of  devotion  which 
has  made  it  soften  and  decay, — Jugum  eorum 
puirescere  fadet  a  fade  oleL 

IIL  The  third  good  which  oui'  JJady  does  to 
her  servants  is,  that  she  conducts  and  directs 
Ihem  according  to  the  will  of  her  Son.  Bebecca 
guided  her  little  Jacob,  and  gave  him  good  ad- 
vice firom  time  to  time;  either  to  draw  upon 
himself  the  blessing  of  his  father,  or  to  avert 


146  TBUB  DSVOnOK  TO 

from  himself  the  hatred  and  persecation  of  his 
brother.  Esau.  Mary^  who  is  the  Star  of  the  Sea, 
leads  all  her  faithftd  servants  to  a  good  port 
She  shows  them  the  paths  of  eternal  life,  ^e 
makes  them  avoid  the  dangerous  places.  She 
conducts  them  by  her  hand  along  the  paths  of 
justice.  She  steadies  them  when  they  are  about 
to  fall ;  she  lifts  them  up  when  they  have  fallen. 
She  reproves  them  like  a  charitable  mother  when 
they  fail;  and  sometimes  she  even  lovingly 
chastises  them.  Can  a  child  obedient  to  Mary, 
his  foster-mother  and  his  enlightened  guide,  go 
astray  in  the  paths  of  etemiiy  ?  Ipsam  aequens 
rum  demos  J — "  If  you  follow  her,"  says  Si  Ber- 
nard, "you  cannot  wander  from  the  road."  Fear 
not,  therefore,  that  a  true  child  of  Mary  can  be 
deceived  by  the  evil  one,  or  fell  into  any  formal 
heresy.  Tliere  where  the  guidance  of  Mary  is, 
neither  the  evil  spirit  with  his  illusions,  nor  the 
heretics  with  their  subtleties,  can  ever  come, — 
Ipsd  tenentej  non  corruis. 

IV.  The  fourth  good  office  which  our  Lady 
renders  to  her  children  and  feithftd  servants  is, 
to  protect  ajid  defend  them.  Rebecca,  by  her 
cares  and  artifices,  delivered  Jacob  from  all 
the  dangers  in  which  he  found  himself,  and  par- 
ticularly from  the  death  which  his  brother  Esaa 
would  have  inflicted  on  him,  because  of  the 
envy  and  hatred  which  he  bore  him;  as  Cain 
did  of  old  to  his  brother  Abel.     Mary,  the  good 


THE  BiiESSBD  VIBGIN.  147 

Mother  of  the  predestinate,  hides  them  under 
the  wings  of  her  protection,  as  a  hen  hides  her 
chickens.  She  speaks,  she  hmnbles  herself,  she 
condescends  to  all  their  weaknesses,  to  secure 
iixem  from  the  hawk  and  the  vulture*  She  puts 
herself  round  about  them,  and  she  accompanies 
th^n,  like  an  army  in  battle  array,  tU  castrorum 
aoks  ordinatcu  Shall  a  man,  who  has  an  army 
(^  a  hundred  thousand  soldiers  around  him,  fear 
his  enemies  ?  A  faithful  servant  of  Mary,  sur-* 
rounded  by  her  protection  and  her  imperial 
power,  has  still  less  to  fear.  This  good  Mother 
and  powerful  princess  of  the  heavens  would 
rather  despatch  battalions  of  millions  of  angels 
to  succour  one  of  her  servants  than  that  it  should 
ever  be  said  that  a  faithful  servant  of  Mary,  who 
trusted  in  her,  had  had  to  succumb  to  the  malice, 
the  number,  and  the  vehemence  of  his  enemies. 

Y.  Lastly,  the  fifth  and  the  greatest  good 
which  the  sweet  Mary  procures  for  her  faithftJ 
clients  is,  to  intercede  for  them  with  her  Son, 
and  to  appease  Him  by  her  prayers.  She  unites 
them  to  Him  with  a  most  intimate  union,  and 
she  keeps  them  unshaken  in  that  union. 

Bebecca  made  Jacob  come  near  to  his  father's 
bed.  The  good  man  touched  him,  embraced 
him,  and  even  kissed  him  with  joy,  being  con- 
tent and  satisfied  with  the  well-dressed  viands 
which  he  had  brought  him ;  and  having  smelt 
with  much  contentment  the  exquisite  perfimie  of 


148  TRUE  lonroTxair  to 

his  garments,  he  cried  out,  Ecce  odor  jilii  mei 
iicut  odor  agn  pleni^  cui  benediwit  Dominus,-^ 
^'Behold  the  odour  of  my  son,  which  is  like  the 
odour  of  a  ftdl  field  that  the  Lord  hath  blest.'* 
This  odour  of  the  fidl  field  which  charms  the 
heart  of  the  Father  is  nothing  else  than  the 
odour  of  the  virtues  and  merits  of  Mary,  who  is 
a  field  ftdl  of  grace,  where  God  the  Father  has 
sown  His  only  Son,  as  a  grain  of  the  wheat  of 
the  elect  Oh,  how  a  child,  perfimied  with  the 
good  odour  of  Mary,  is  welcome  with  Jesus 
Christ,  who  is  the  Father  of  the  world  to  come ! 
Oh,  how  promptly  and  how  perfectly  is  such  a 
child  united  to  his  Lord  I  But  we  have  shown 
this  at  length  already. 

Furthermore,  after  Mary  has  heaped  her  fisi- 
vours  upon  her  children  and  faithftd  servants, 
and  has  obtained  for  them  the  benediction  of  her 
Heavenly  Father,  and  union  with  Jesus  Christ, 
she  preserves  them  in  Jesus,  and  Jesus  in  them: 
She  takes  care  of  them,  watches  over  them 
always,  for  fear  they  should  lose  the  grace  cf 
God,  and  fall  back  into  the  snares  of  their  ene^ 
mies.  In  plenitudine  detinet^ — she  detains  the 
fiaints  in  their  ftilness,  and  makes  them  perse- 
vere to  the  end,  as  we  have  seen. 

This  is  the  interpretation  of  [the  history  of 
Jacob  and  Esau]  that  great  and  ancient  figure 
of  predestination  and  reprobation,  so  unknown, 
and  so  ftill  of  mysteries. 


TKB  BLBBSSD  TIBGm.  149 

nL  THE  WONDERFUL  EFFECTS  WHICH  THIS  DE- 
VOTION PRODUCES  IN  THE  SOUL  WHICH  IS 
FAITHFUL  TO  IT. 

My  dear  brother,  be  sure  that,  if  you  are 
&ithful  to  the  interior  and  exterior  practices  of 
lius  devotion,  which  I  will  point  out,  the  follow-' 
iBg  effects  will  take  place  in  your  soul : 

1.  By  the  light  which  the  Holy  Ghost  will 
give  you  by  His  dear  Spouse,  Mary,  you  will 
understand  your  own  evil,  your  corruption,  and 
your  ineapaeity  for  any  thing  good,  which  is 
fiot  (}od's  free  gift  to  us,  rither  as  Author 
«f  nature  or  of  grace.  In  consequence  of  this 
knowledge,  you  will  despise  yourself.  You 
will  only  iiiink  of  yourself  with  horror.  You 
will  regard  yoursdf  as  a  snail,  that  spoila 
every  thing  with  its  slime;  or  a  toad,  that 
peisons  every  thing  with  its  venom ;  or  as  a 
apiteAil  serpent,  only  seeking  to  deceive.  In 
dOaer  words^  the  humUe  Mary  will  communi- 
cate to  you  a  portion  of  her  profound  humiliiy , 
wiiieh  will  make  you  despise  yourself,  despise 
aobody  else,  but  love  to  be  despised  yourself. 

2.  Our  Blessed  Lady  will  give  you  also  a 
portion  of  her  &ith,  which  was  the  greatest  of 
til  fiuths  that  ever  were  on  earth,  greater  than 
Use  &ith  of  all  the  Patriarchs,  Proph^,  Apos- 
tles, and  Saints  put  together.  Now  that  she  is 
Deigning  in  the  heavens,  she  has  no  longer  this 

M 


THE  BLESSED  YIBGIN.  151 

dead  in  sin,  to  teach  and  overthrow,  by  your 
meek  and  powerftd  words,  the  hearts  of  marble 
and  the  cedars  of  Lebanon,  and  finally,  to  resist 
the  devil  and  all  the  enemies  of  salvation. 

3.  This  Mother  of  fair  love  will  take  away 
ttom.  your  heart  all  scruple  and  all  disorder  of 
servile  fear.  She  will  open  and  enlarge  it  to 
run  the  way  of  her  Son's  commandments  with 
the  holy  liberty  of  the  children  of  God.  She 
will  introduce  into  it  pure  love,  of  which  she 
has  the  treasure ;  so  that  you  shall  no  longer  be 
guided  by  fear,  as  hitherto,  in  your  dealings 
with  the  Gtod  of  charity,  but  by  pure  love.  You 
will  look  on  Him  as  your  good  Father,  whom 
you  will  be  incessantly  trying  to  please,  and 
with  whom  you  will  converse  confidently,  as  a 
^Id  with  its  tender  father.  If  unfortunately 
you  offend  Him,  you  will  at  once  humble  your- 
self before  Him.  You  will  ask  His  pardon  with 
great  lowliness,  but  at  the  same  time  you  will 
stretch  your  hand  out  to  Him  with  simplicity ; 
and  you  will  raise  yourself  up  lovingly,  without 
trouble  or  disquietude,  and  go  on  your  way  to 
ffim  without  discouragement. 

4.  Our  Blessed  Lady  will  fill  you  with  a 
great  confidence. in  God  and  in  herself:  (1) 
tecause  you  will  not  be  approaching  to  Jesus 
Bjr  yourself,  but  always  by  that  good  Mother ; 
(2)  because,  as  you  have  given  her  all  your 
merits,  graces,  and  satisfactions,  to  dispose  of  at 


159  TBUB  DKVOnOK  TO 

her  will,  she  will  commtuiicate  to  you  her  virtues, 
and  will  clothe  you  in  her  merits,  so  that  jem 
will  be  able  to  say  to  GU)d  with  eonfidenee,  ^  Be* 
hold  Mary  Thy  handmaid ;  be  it  done  unto  me 
according  to  Thy  word,'* — Ecee  ancUla  Dcmmiy 
jwt  mihi  secundum  verbum  tuum;  (3)  because^ 
as  you  have  given  yourself  entirely  to  her,  body 
and  soul,  she,  who  is  liberal  with  the  liberal^ 
and  more  liberal  even  than  the  Uberal,  will  ia 
return  give  herself  to  you  in  a  marvellous  but 
real  manner,  so  that  you  may  say  to  her  witib 
assurance,  Tuus  sum  ego^  salvummefacf^^^  I  aaa 
thine,  holy  Virgin ;  save  me:"  or,  as  I  have  said 
before,  .with  the  Beloved  Disciple,  Accepi  te  in 
mea, — ''  I  have  taken  thee,  holy  Mother,  ibr  all 
my  goods."  You  may  also  say  with  St.  Bonar 
venture,  Ecce^  Dominay  sahatrix  meoy^ueiaiU 
ter  ogam  el  non  timeioy  quia  fortiiudo  mea^  et  lems 
mea  in  Domino  es  tu;  and  in  anotherplace,  7\^|w 
totus  ego  sum^  et  omnia  mea  tua  sunt;  0  ffitgo 
gloriosay  super  omnia  benediatay  ponam  te  tfit  siff^ 
naculum  super  cor  meumiy  quia  fortis  est  ut  mma 
dilectio  tua.  "  My  dear  Mistress,  who  savea  m^ 
I  will  have  confidence  and  will  not  fear,  beeaiMe 
you  are  my  strength  and  my  praise  in  Hbe  Loi^ 
...  I  am  altogether  yours,  and  all  that  I  hiife 
belongs  to  you;  0  glorious  Virgin,  blessod 
above  all  created  things!  I  will  put  you  aa  a 
seal  upon  my  heart,  because  your  love  ia  «b 
strong  as  death." 


THB  BLC88BI)  VlfiatK.  153 

You  may  say  to  God,  in  the  sentiments  of 
tiiB  proj^et^  Dcmme^  non  est  eaaltatum  cor  meunij 
mqus  elati  atmt  ocuU  mei;  neque  ambulcm  in 
magnUj  neque  in  mirabiMms  super  me^  si  non 
hundliter  senHebam;  sed  eaxiltavi  animam  meant : 
mcmt  ablacia6us  est  super  matre  tua^  ita  retrHmtio 
iat  eawma  mea^^-^^^  Lord,  my  heart  and  my  eyes 
iMfcve  no  right  to  extol  themselves,  or  to  be 
jnxmd,  or  to  seek  great  and  wonderftd  things. 
Yet  even  in  this  I  am  not  humbler  but  I  have 
fitted  up  and  enoouraged  my  soul  by  confidence : 
J  am  like  a  child,  weaned  from  the  pleasures  of 
earth,  and  resting  on  its  mother's  lap ;  and  it  is 
^n  that  lap  that  all  good  things  come  to  me'' 
(flee  Psalm  oxxx.).     (4)  What  will  still  farther 
iwsroase  your  confidence  in  her  is,  that  you  will 
bave  less  confidence  in  yourself.     You  have 
^T6n  her,  in  trust,  all  you  have  of  good  about 
jou,  that  she  may  have  it  and  keep  it;  and  so  all 
:  ib^  trust  you  once  had  in  yourself  has  become 
an  increase  of  confidence  in  her,  who  is  your 
traasure.     Oh,  what  confidence  and  what  conso- 
.  linlifm  is  this  for  a  soul,  who  can  say  that  tiie 
ctoeasure  of  Gbd,  where  He  has  been  pleased  to 
.^fiit  all  He  had  most  precious,  is  his  own  trea- 
^  fore  also  I  Ipsa  est  thesaurus  Domini     It  was  a 
^  Saint  who  said  she  was  the  treasure  of  the  Lord* 
5.  The  soul  of  our  Blessed  Lady  wiU  com- 
municate itself  to  you,  to  glorify  the  Lord. 
Her  9fwi  will  enter  into  the  place  of  yours,  to 


154  TBUE  DEYOTIOK  TO 

rejoice  in  Qod  her  salvation,  provided  only  ^baA 
jou  are  faithM  to  the  practices  of  this  devoticHu 
Sit  in  singulis  anima  Maricey  vt  magni/icet  D<ynA* 
nam :  sit  in  singulis  spiritus  Marice^  ut  eandtet  tA 
Deo  (Si  Ambrose), — "  Let  the  soul  of  Mary  be 
in  each  of  us  to  glorify  the  Lord  :  let  the  spirit 
of  Mary  be  in  each  of  us  to  rejoice  in  God." 
Ah!  when  will  the  happy  time  come,  said  a 
holy  man  of  our  own  days,  who  was  all  ab^ 
sorbed  in  Mary,- — ah!  when  will  the  happy 
time  come,  when  the  divine  Mary  will  be  estab- 
lished mistress  and  queen  of  hearts,  in  order 
that  she  may  subject  them  ftdly  to  the  empire 
of  her  great  and  holy  Jesus  ?  When  will  souls 
breathe  Mary,  as  the  body  breathes  air  ?  When 
that  time  comes,  wonderful  things  will  happen 
in  those  lowly  places,  where  the  Holy  Ghost, 
finding  His  dear  Spouse  as  it  were  reproduced 
in  souls,  shall  come  in  with  abundance,  and  fill 
them  fiill  to  overflowing  with  His  gifls,  and 
particularly  with  the  gift  of  wisdom,  to  wcark 
the  miracles  of  grace.  My  dear  brother,  when 
will  that  happy  time,  that  age  of  Mary,  come, 
when  souls,  losing  themselves  in  the  abyss  of 
her  interior,  shall  become  living  copies  of  Maiy, 
to  love  and  glorify  Jesus  ?  That  time  wiU  not 
come  until  men  shall  know  and  practise  tins 
devotion  which  I  am  teaching.  Ut  adveniat 
Tegnvjm  tuum^  adveniat  regnum  MaricB, 

6.  K  Mary,  who  is  the  tree  of  life,  is  wall 


THE  BLBBSED  VIBOIN.  155 

iSDitiyated  in  our  soul  by  fidelity  to  the  praotioes 
of  this  devotion,  she  will  bear  her  fi:tiit  in  her 
own  time,  and  her  fi:tiit  is  none  other  than  Jesus 
CSnrist.  How  many  devout  souls  do  I  see  who 
seek  Jesus  Christ,  some  by  one  way  or  by  one 
practice,  and  others  by  otiier  ways  and  other 
praddces;  and  after  they  have  toiled  much 
throughout  the  night,  liiey  say.  Per  totam 
noetem  laborantes  nihil  cepimua^ — "  We  have 
toiled  all  night,  and  have  taken  nothing"  I  We 
may  say  to  them,  Laborastia  multum^  et  intulis^ 
tis  paruniy — "  You  have  laboured  much,  and 
gained  little :"  Jesus  Christ  is  yet  feeble  in  you. 
But  by  that  immaculate  way  of  Mary,  and  that 
divine  practice  which  I  am  teaching,  we  toil 
during  the  day;  we  toil  in  a  holy  place;  we 
toil  but  little.  There  is  no  night  in  Mary,  be- 
cause there  is  no  sin,  nor  even  the  slightest 
shade.  Mary  is  a  holy  place,  and  the  holy  of 
holies  where  Saints  are  formed  and  moulded. 
Take  notice,  if  you  please,  that  I  say  the  Saints 
are  moulded  in  Mary.  There  is  a  great  differ- 
ence between  making  a  figure  in  relief  by  blows 
of  hammer  and  chisel,  and  making  a  figure  by 
iinrowing  it  into  a  mould.  Statuaries  and  sculp- 
tors labour  much  to  make  figures  in  the  first 
manner ;  but  to  make  them  in  the  second  man- 
ner, they  work  little,  and  do  their  work  quickly. 
St.  Augustin  calls  our  Blessed  Lady  forma 
Deiy — "  the  mould  of  Gk)d :"  Si  formam  Dei  te 


156  TBUB  DSYOnON  TO 

€^ppeUemj  digna  eaistis, — ^^  The  mould  fit  to  eaat 
«nd  mould  gods."  He  who  is  cast  in  iUtt 
mould  is  presently  formed  and  moulded  in  Jesus 
Christy  and  Jesus  Christ  in  him.  At  a  aUghl 
expense  and  in  a  short  time  he  will  become  Q^^ 
hecause  he  has  been  cast  in  the  sama  mould 
which  has  formed  a  Qod. 

It  seems  to  me  that  I  can  very  aptly  ocun^ 
pare  directors  and  devout  persons^  who  wish  to 
form  Jesus  Christ  in  themselves  or  others  by 
different  practices  &om  this,  to  sculptors  wfa» 
trust  in  their  own  professional  skill,  ingenuity^ 
or  art,  and  so  give  an  infinity  of  hammerings 
and  chisellings  to  a  hard  stone  or  a  piece  of  badly 
polished  wood,  to  make  an  image  of  Jesus  Christ 
out  of  it.  Sometimes  they  do  not  succeed  in 
giving  any  thing  like  the  natural  expression  of 
Jesus,  either  fi*om  having  no  knowledge  or  exA 
perience  of  the  Person  of  Jesus,  or  fi-om  scnne 
blow  awkwardly  given,  which  has  spoiled  tlie 
work.  But  for  those  who  embrace  the  aeciot 
of  grace  which  I  am  revealing  to  th^n,  I  rxus^ 
reasonably  compare  them  to  founders  and  eastp* 
ers,  who  have  discovered  tJie  beautiftd  mould  d 
Mary,  where  Jesus  was  naturally  and  diviirafy. 
formed;  and  without  trusting  to  their  own  skiH^ 
but  only  in  the  goodness  of  the  mould,  they  eaafe 
themselves  and  lose  themselves  in  Maiy,  to  b^ 
come  the  portraits  of  Jesus  Christ  after  nature. 

Oh,  beautiful  and  true  comparison  I  but  who 


THX  BLEflfiED  YHUHK.  157 

w31  c(»npreh^id  it  ?  I  deeire  that  you  may,  my 
dear  brother.  But  remember  that  we  only  cast 
m  a  mould  what  is  melted  and  liquid ;  iiiat  ia 
to  say,  you  must  destroy  and  melt  down  in 
yourself  the  old  Adam  to  become  the  new  one 
in  Mary. 

7.  By  this  practiee,  faithftdly  observed,  you 
will  give  Jesus  more  glory  in  a  month  than  by 
any  other  practice,  however  difficult,  in  many 
years ;  and  I  give  the  following  reasons  for  it. 

(1)  Because,  doingyour  actions  by  our  Blessed 
Lady,  as  this  practice  teaches  you,  you  abandon 
your  own  intentions  and  operations,  although 
good  and  known,  to  lose  yourself,  so  to  speak, 
in  the  intentions  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,  altliough 
fliey  are  unknown.  Thus  you  enter  by  partici- 
pation into  the  sublimity  of  her  intentions,  which 
az6  so  pure,  that  she  gives  more  glory  to  God  by 
the  least  of  her  actions— for  example,  in  twirling 
her  distaff  or  pointing  her  needle-— than  St.  Law- 
Teao&  by  his  cruel  martyrdom  on  his  gridiron^ 
or  ev^i  all  the  Saints  by  all  their  heroic  actions 
put  together.  It  was  thus  that,  during  her  so- 
jDum  here  below,  she  acquired  such  an  unspeak- 
aide  aggregate  of  graces  and  merits,  that  it  were 
^asi^  to  count  the  stars  of  the  firmament,  the 
diops  of  water  in  the  sea,  or  the  grains  of  sand 
Bpon  its  shore,  than  her  merits  and  graces.  Thus 
it  was  that  she  gave  more  glory  to  Qod  than  all 
the  Angels  and  Saints  have  given  Him,  or  ev^ 


158  THUE  DEVOnON  TO 

will  give  Him.  0  prodigy  of  a  Mary!  thou  catist 
not  help  but  do  prodigies  of  grace  in  souls  that 
wish  to  lose  themselves  altogether  in  thee  I 

(2)  Because  the  soul  in  this  practice  counts 
as  nothing  whatever  it  thinks  or  does  of  itself; 
and  only  puts  its  trust,  and  takes  its  pleasure, 
in  the  dispositions  of  Mary,  when  it  approaches 
Jesus,  or  even  speaks  to  Him.  Thus  it  practises 
humiliiy  far  more  than  the  souls  who  act  of 
themselves,  and  lean,  with  however  impercep- 
tible a  complacency,  on  their  own  dispositions. 
But  if  the  soul  acts  more  humbly,  it  therefore 
glorifies  God  more  highly ;  and  He  is  only  per- 
fectly glorified  by  the  himible,  and  those  that  are 
little  and  lowly  in  heart 

(3)  Because  our  Blessed  Lady,  wishing  by 
her  great  chariiy  to  receive  the  present  of  our 
actions  in  her  virginal  hands,  gives  them  an 
admirable  beauiy  and  splendour.  Moreover, 
she  offers  them  herself  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  with- 
out difficuliy ;  and  our  Lord  is  thus  more  glori- 
fied by  them  than  if  we  offered  them  by  our 
own  criminal  hands. 

(4)  Lastly,  because  you  never  think  of  Mary 
without  Mary,  in  your  place,  thinking  of  Otod, 
You  never  praise  or  honour  Mary  without  Mary 
praising  and  honouring  God.  Mary  is  altch* 
gether  relative  to  Gt)d;  and,  indeed,  I  mighi 
well  call  her  the  relation  to  GoA.  She  only 
exists  vdtfa  reference  to  God     She  is  the  echo 


THE  BLESSED  YISGIN.  159 

o£  Ckxi,  who  says  nothing,  repeats  nothing,  but 
Glod.  If  you  say  *  Mary,' she  says  *  GkxL'  St. 
Elizabeth  praised  Mary,  and  called  her  blessed, 
because  she  had  believed.  Mary,  the  faithful 
echo  of  Grod,  at  once  intoned  Magnificat  anima 
mea  JDominum, — "  My  soul  doth  magnify  the 
Lead."  That  which  Mary  did  then,  she  does 
daily  now.  When  we  praise  her,  love  her,  honour 
her,  or  give  any  thing  to  her,  it  is  Grod  who  is 
praised,  Gfod  who  is  loved,  Gtxi  who  is  glorified. 
We  give  then  to  Qt)d  by  Mary  and  in  Mary. 

IV.  PABTICULAB  PRACTICES  OF  THIS 
DEVOTION. 

1.  External  Practices. 
Although  what  is  essential  in  this  devotion 
consists  in  the  interior,  we  must  not  fail  to  unite 
to  the  inward  practice  certain  external  observ- 
ances. Hcec  oportet  facerey  et  Ula  nan  omittere. 
We  must  do  the  one,  yet  not  leave  the  other 
undone,  both  because  the  outward  practices 
well  performed  aid  the  inward  ones,  and  be- 
cause they  make  a  man  remember,  by  remind- 
ing has  senses,  what  he  has  done  or  ought  to  do  j 
and  also  because  they  are  suitable  to  edify  our 
neighbour,  who  sees  them,  which  inward  prac- 
tices cannot  do.  Let  no  worldling  then  or  critic 
sneer  at  this.  Let  them  not  say  that  because 
true  devotion  is  in  the  heart,  we  must  avoid 


160  i»T7B  imwcinoiK  TO 

exteraal  deyotion ;  or  that  devotion  ought  to  he 
bidden,  and  that  tibere  may  be  vanity  in  showing 
it.  Z  answer  with  my  Master,  that  men  shouM 
see  our  good  works,  that  they  may  glorify  our 
^Father,  who  is  in  Heav^i ;  not,  as  St.  Gtregory 
says,  that  wo  ought  to  perform  our  actions  and 
axterior  devotions  to  please  men  and  to  get 
ja^aise, — ihat  would  be  vanity, — but  that  w© 
should  som^mes  do  them  before  men,  wxdi 
the  view  of  pleasing  Qodj  and  glorifying  Him 
thereby,  without  caring  either  for  the  contempt 
or  the  praise  of  men. 

I  will  only  allude  briefly  to  some  exterior 
practices,  which  I  do  not  call '  exterior'  because 
we  do  them  without  any  interior,  but  because 
they  have  something  outward  about  them,  to 
distinguish  them  &om  those  which  are  purely 
inward. 

First  Practice.  Those  who  wish  to  enter  into 
this  particular  devoti<m,  which  is  not  at  presort 
erected  into  a  confraternity,  though  that  wei^ 
to  be  wished, — ^after  having,  as  I  said  in  ifad 
first  part  of  this  pareparation  for  the  reign  of 
Jesus  Christ,  employed  twelve  days,  at  least,  m 
emptying  themselves  of  the  spirit  of  the  wcndd^ 
which  is  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  Jesus  Ghro^ 
• — should  employ  three  weeks  in  filling  thent- 
selves  with  Jesus  Christ  by  the  holy  Yir^i. 
They  should  pursue  the  following  order : 

During  the  first  week  they  should  employ 


THE  WiTOIWlP  YIBOiQl.  161 

dd  ^ir  porayers  and  pious  actions  in  adking 
lior  ft  knowledge  of  tbemselyes^  and  for  eontri- 
tion  of  their  sins ;  and  they  should  do  this  in  a 
qpirit  of  humiliiy.  For  that  end  they  can,  if 
they  choose,  meditate  on  what  Ihaye  said  hefare 
of  our  inward  oorruption.  They  can  look  upon 
themselves  during  the  six  days  of  this  week  wa 
snails,  crawling  things,  toads,  swine,  serpents, 
and  unelean  animals;  or  they  can  reflect  on 
ihoise  three  oon^derations  of  Si  Bernard,  the 
Yileness  of  our  origin,  the  dishonours  of  our  pre- 
sent state,  and  our  ending  as  the  food  of  worms. 
They  should  pray  our  Lord  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  enlighten  them ;  and  for  that  end  they  might 
use  the  ejaculations,  Domme^  ut  xideam^  or  N(h 
verim  me^  or  Veni  Sande  Spiritua;  and  iiiey  may 
say  daily  the  Ave  Tncms  steUa,  and  the  liteny  ci 
the  Holy  Ghost. 

During  the  second  week  they  should  apply 

themselves,  during  all  their  prayers  and  works 

jQ9^  day,  to  know  the  Blessed  Virgin.     They 

Aould  ask  this  knowledge  of  the  Holy  Ghost; 

tii^  should  read  and  meditate  what  we  have 

iBaid  about  it.    They  should  recite,  as  in  the  first 

-iweek,  the  litany  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  Ave 

maris  Stella^  and  in  addition  a  Bosary  daily,  or, 

\£  not  a  whole  Bosary,  at  least  a  chaplet,  fixr 

ihe  intention  of  impetrating  more  knowledge  of 

Mary. 

They  should  apply  themselves  in  the  third 


162  TBUB  DEVOTION  TO 

^eek  to  know  Jesus  Christ.  They  can  meditate 
upon  what  we  have  said  about  Him,  and  say  the 
prayer  of  Si  Augustine,  which  they  will  find  in 
the  first  part  of  this  treatise.  They  can,  with 
the  same  Saint,  repeat  a  hundred  times  a  day, 
Naoerim  te^ — "Lord,  that  I  might  know  Thee  1" 
or  Dominey  ut  videamj — "Lord,  that  I  might 
see  who  Thou  art!"  They  shall  recite,  as  in  the ' 
preceding  weeks,  the  litany  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
and  the  Ave  maris  steUa^  and  they  shall  add 
<iaily  the  litany  of  the  Holy  Name  of  Jesus.  At 
the  end  of  the  three  weeks  they  shall  confess 
and  communicate,  with  the  intention  of  giving 
themselves  to  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  quality  of 
•slaves  of  love,  by  the  hands  of  Mary.  After 
communion,  whidhi  they  should  try  to  make  ac- 
cording to  the  method  given  farther  on,  they 
should  recite  the  formula  of  their  consecration, 
which  they  will  find  afterwards.  They  ought  to 
write  it,  or  have  it  written,  unless  it  is  printed; 
and  they  should  sign  it  the  same  day  they  have 
made  it  It  would  be  well  also  that  on  that 
day  they  should  pay  some  tribute  to  Jesus  Christ 
and  our  Blessed  Lady,  either  as  a  penance  fer 
their  past  imfaithftilness  to  the  vows  of  their- 
Baptism,  or  in  testimony  of  their  dependence 
and  allegiance  to  tiie  domain  of  Jesus  and*' 
Mary.  This  tribute  ought  to  be  according  to 
the  devotion  and  capacity  of  eveiy  one,  as  a 
fast,  a  mortification,  an  alms,  or  a  candle.     IP 


THE  BLESSED  YntGIV.  163 

they  iiad  but  a  pin  to  give  in  homage,  yet  gave 
it  with  a  good  heart,  it  would  be  enough  for 
Jesus,  who  looks  only  at  the  good-will.  Once  a 
year  at  least,  on  the  same  day,  they  should  renew 
the  same  consecration,  observing  the  same  prac- 
tices during  the  three  weeks.  They  might  also 
once  a  month,  or  even  once  a  day,  renew  what 
they  have  done  by  these  few  words :  Turn  totus 
ego  mm  J  et  omnia  mea  tua  sunt^ — ^^  I  am  all  for 
Thee,  and  all  I  have  belongs  to  Thee,  0  my 
sweet  Jesus,  by  Mary  Thy  holy  Mother." 

Second  Practice.  They  may  recite  every  day 
of  their  life,  without  however  making  any  bur- 
den of  it,  the  Little  Corona  of  the  Blessed  Virgin, 
composed  of  three  Our  Fathers  and  twelve 
Hail  Marys,  in  honour  of  our  Lady's  twelve 
privileges  and  grandeurs.  This  is  a  very  ancient 
practice,  for  it  has  its  foundation  in  the  holy 
Scriptures.  St.  John  saw  a  woman  crowned 
with  twelve  stars,  clothed  with  the  sun,  and 
htdding  the  moon  under  her  feet;  and  this 
woman,  according  to  the  interpreters,  was  the 
most  holy  Virgin.  There  are  many  ways  of 
saying  this  Corona  well ;  but  it  would  be  too 
Icmg  to  enter  upon  them.  The  Holy  Ghost  will 
teach  them  to  those  who  are  the  most  faithM 
to  this  devotion.  Nevertheless,  to  say  it  quite 
dimply  we  should  begin  by  saying,  Dignare  me 
Icmdare  te^  Virgo  sacrataj  da  mihi  virtutem  contra 
ho8te8  tuo8.    After  that  we  should  say  the  Credo, 


164  TRux  Dsvonov  to 

and  then  a  Pater  with  four  Aves^  and  th^i  one 
Gloria  Patri ;  then  another  Pater^  four  Aves,  and 
one  Gloria  Patri,  and  so  on  with  the  rest;  and 
at  the  end  we  should  say  the  Sub  tuum  preemlium. 
Third  Practice.  It  is  a  most  gloriooi  and 
praiseworthy  thing,  and  very  useful  to  those  who 
have  thus  made  themselves  slaves  of  Jesi»  and 
Mary,  that  they  should  wear,  as  a  badge  of  their 
loving  slavery,  little  iron  chains,  blessed  with 
the  proper  benediction.* 

*  Note  from  the  French.  It  may  be  thought  that, 
since  the  time  of  the  venerable  servant  of  God,  cer- 
tain decrees  of  the  Congregation  of  the  Index  have  ab- 
soltttely  condemned  this  usage ;  but  whatever  may  be 
the  precise  extent  of  the  prohibition  intended  by  these 
decrees,  there  seems  to  be  nothing  in  them  formally 
interdicting  the  using  of  little  chains  io private  persons. 
We  may  see  at  the  end  of  Collet's 'Life  of  Boudonthe 
remarks  of  that  theologian,  justifying  the  pious  Ardi* 
deacon  of  Evreux  from  the  criticisms  of  which  he 
was  the  object,  by  the  occasion  of  his  treatise  Le 
saint  Esclavage  de  la  Sainte  Vierge.  He  cites  the  de- 
crees which  he  read  in  the  edition  of  the  Index  of 
1758,  and  which  have  been  repeated  in  the  subset 
quent  editions.  The  words  of  the  Index  are  as  fol> 
lows :  "  Prohibentur  imagines,  numismata  insculpta 
pro  confratemitatibus  mancipiorum  Matris  Dei,  ita- 
lice  schiavi  della  Madre  di  Dio,  sodales  catenates 
exprimentia.  Item  libelli  in  quibus  eisdem  conftar> 
temitatibus  regulse  prsescribentur.  Confratemitatei 
autem  quse  catenulas  distribuunt  confratribus  et  con- 
sororibus,  brachiis  et  collo  circumponendas  atque  geft- 
tandas,  ut  eo  signo  beatissimse  Virgini  mancipatos  se 
esse  profiteantur,  et  quainim  institutum  in  eo  manol* 


TBE  BLBS8BD  YimiN.  165 

;  It  is  perfectly  trae  that  these  external  badges 
lire  not  essential,  and  a  person  who  has  embraced 
this  devotion  may  very  well  go  without  them; 
nevertheless,  I  cannot  refrain  from  warmly 
praising  those  who,  after  having  shaken  off  the 
shamefrd  chains  of  the  slavery  of  the  devil,  in 
which  original  sin,  and  perhaps  actual  sins, 
had  engaged  them,  have  voluntarily  surrendered 
themselves  to  the  glorious  slavery  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  glory  with  St.  Paul  in  being  in  chains  for 
Jesus ;  chains  a  thousand  times  more  glorious 
and  precious,  though  of  iron,  than  all  ihe  golden 
collars  of  emperors. 

Once  thwe  was  nothing  more  infamous  on 
earth  than  the  Cross,  and  now  that  wood  is  the 
most  glorious  boast  of  Christianity.  Let  us  say 
the  same  of  the  irons  of  slavery.  There  was 
nothing  more  ignominious  among  the  ancients ; 
notiiing  more  shameM  even  now  among  the 
heathen.  But  among  Christians  there  is  nothing 
more  illustrious  iJian  the  chains  of  Jesus ;  for 
they  unchain  us,  and  preserve  us  from  the  in* 
famous  fetters  of  sin  and  ihe  deviL  They  set  us 
at  liberty,  and  chain  us  to  Jesus  and  Mary ;  not 
by  compulsion  and  constraint,  like  galley-slaves, 

pflta  prsBcipue  yersatur,  damnantur  et  €xsiinguuntur. 
Societatibus  vero  quas  ritum  aliquem  aut  quodcumque 
aliud  ad  mancipatum  ejusmodi  pertinens  adhibent, 
prsBoipitur  ut  id  statim  rejiciant"  (Index,  Decreta  ge- 
neralia,  §  8,  n.  3). 

N 


166  TRUE  DEVOTIOH  TO 

but  by  charity  and  love,  like  children.  Traham 
€08  in  vinculis  cJiaritatisy — "  I  will  draw  them  to 
Me,"  said  Grod  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet,  "by 
the  chains  of  love."  These  chains  are  as  strong 
as  death,  and  they  are  in  a  certain  sense  strongest 
in  those  who  are  faithM  in  carrying  these  glo- 
rious badges  to  their  death.  For,  though  death 
destroys  their  bodies  in  bringing  them  to  cor- 
ruption, it  does  not  destroy  the  chains  of  their 
slavery,  which,  being  of  iron,  do  not  corrupt  so 
easily.  Perhaps,  at  the  day  of  the  resurrection 
of  the  body,  the  grand  last  judgment,  these 
chains  shall  still  be  round  their  bones,  and  shall 
make  a  part  of  their  glory,  and  be  transmuted 
into  chains  of  light  and  splendour.  Happy,  then, 
a  thousand  times  happy,  the  illustrious  slaves 
of  Jesus,  who  wear  their  chains  even  to  the 
tomb! 

The  following  are  the  reasons  for  wearing 
these  little  chains : 

First,  it  is  to  remind  the  Christian  of  the 
vows  and  engagements  of  his  Baptism,  of  the 
perfect  renewal  he  has  made  of  them  by  this  de- 
votion, and  of  the  strict  obligation  under  which 
he  is  to  be  faithM  to  them.  As  the  man  who 
shapes  his  course  more  often  by  the  senses  than 
by  pure  faith  easily  forgets  his  obligations  to- 
wards God,  unless  he  has  some  outward  thing  to 
remind  him  of  them,  these  little  chains  serve 
marvellously  to  remind  the  Christian  of  the 


THE  BLESSED  TIRGIN.  167 

Cumins  of  sin,  and  of  the  slavery  of  the  devil, 
from  which  Baptism  has  delivered  him,  and  of 
the  dependence  on  Jesus  which  he  has  vowed 
to  Him  in  Baptism,  and  of  the  ratification  of  it 
which  he  has  made  by  the  renewal  of  his  vows. 
One  of  the  reasons  why  so  few  Christians  think 
of  their  baptismal  vows,  and  live  with  as  much 
license  as  if  they  had  promised  no  more  to  Grod 
than  the  heathen,  is  because  they  do  not  wear 
any  external  badge  to  make  them  remember 
it. 

Secondly,  it  is  to  show  that  we  are  not 
ashamed  of  the  servitude  and  slavery  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  that  we  renounce  the  slavery  of  the 
world,  sin,  and  the  devil. 

Thirdly,  it  is  to  guarantee  ourselves  from  the 
chains  of  sin  and  the  devil,  and  to  be  beforehand 
with  them ;  for  we  must  wear  either  the  chains 
of  iniquiiy,  or  the  chains  of  charity  and  salva- 
tion :  Vincula  peccatorum  aut  vincula  cliarUatis* 
O  my  dear  brother,  let  us  break  the  chains  of 
sin  and  of  sinners,  of  the  world  and  of  worldli- 
ness,  of  the  devil  and  his  ministers ;  and  let  us 
cast  far  from  us  their  depressing  yoke  :  Dirum- 
parrvas  vincula  eorumj  et  projiciamui  a  nobis  ju^ 
gum  ipsorum.  Let  us  put  our  feet,  to  use  the 
terms  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  into  His  glorious  irons, 
and  our  neck  into  His  collars:  Injice  pedem 
tuum  in  compedes  illiusy  et  in  torques  illius  collum 
timm;  suijice  humerum  tuum  et  porta  illam^  et  ne 


168  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

acedieris  vinculis  ejus.  You  will  remark  that 
the  Holy  Ghost,  before  saying  these  words,  pre- 
pares a  soul  for  them,  lest  it  should  reject  His 
important  counsel.  See  His  words:  Attdi^JUiy 
et  accipe  consilium  intellectuSy  et  ne  ahjidas  consUia 
mea^ — "  Hearken,  My  son,  and  receive  a  counsel 
of  understanding,  and  reject  not  My  counseL" 

You  would  wish,  my  very  dear  friend,  that 
I  should  here  unite  myself  to  the  Holy  Ghost  to 
give  you  the  same  counsel  with  Him.  Vinatda 
Ulius  alligatura  salutisj — His  chains  are  chains  of 
salvation.  As  Jesus  Christ  on  the  cross  ought 
to  draw  all  things  to  Him,  with  their  will  or 
against  it.  He  will  draw  the  reprobate  by  the 
chains  of  their  sins,  that  He  may  chain  them  like 
galley-slaves  and  devils  to  His  eternal  anger  and 
revengefiil  justice.  But  He  will,  and  partioa* 
larly  in  these  latter  times,  draw  the  predestinate 
by  the  chains  of  charity.  Omnia  trdham  ad  me* 
ipsum^  Traham  eos  in  vinculis  charitatis.  These 
loving  slaves  of  Jesus  Christ,  "  the  chained  of 
Christ,"— FiTzo^i  Christij — can  wear  their  chains 
either  on  their  neck  or  on  their  feet.  Father 
Vincent  Caraffa,  seventh  general  of  the  Jesuits, 
who  died  in  the  odour  of  sanctity,  in  the  year 
1643,  used  to  wear  a  circle  of  iron  round  his 
feet  as  a  mark  of  his  servitude ;  and  said  that  his 
only  pain  was  that  he  could  not  publicly  drag 
a  chain. 

The  Mother  Agnes  of  Jesus,  of  whom  we 


THB  BLESSED  VIBQIN.  169 

have  spoken  before,  used  to  wear  an  iron  chain 
round  her  body.  Others  have  worn  it  round 
their  neck,  in  penance  for  the  collars  of  pearls 
which  they  have  worn  in  the  world ;  while  other  j 
have  worn  it  round  their  arms,  to  remind  them- 
selves, in  their  manual  labours,  that  they  were 
slaves  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Fourth  Practice.  Those  who  undertake  this 
holy  slavery  should  have  a  very  special  devotion  to 
the  great  mystery  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Word 
on  the  25th  of  March.  Indeed,  the  Incarnation 
is  the  proper  mystery  of  this  practice,  inasmuch 
as  it  was  a  devotion  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
first,  to  honour  and  imitate  the  ineffable  de- 
pendence which  Grod  the  Son  has  been  pleased 
to  have  on  Mary,  for  His  Father's  glory  and 
our  salvation;  which  dependence  particularly  ap- 
pears in  this  mystery,  where  Jesus  is  a  captive 
and  a  slave  in  the  bosom  of  the  divine  Mary, 
and  depends  upon  her  for  all  things ;  secondly, 
to  thank  God  for  the  incomparable  graces  He 
has  given  Mary,  and  particularly  for  having 
chosen  her  to  be  His  most  holy  Mother,  which 
choice  was  made  in  this  mystery.  These  are  the 
two  principal  ends  of  the  slavery  of  Jesus  in 
Mary. 

Have  the  goodness  to  observe  that  I  gene- 
rally say  '  the  slave  of  Jesus  in  Mary,'  ^  the  sla- 
very of  Mary  in  Jesus.'  I  might,  in  good  truth, 
as  many  have  done  before,  say  ^the  slave  of 


170  TECTB  DEVOnOV  TO 

Mary/  ^  flie  slavery  of  the  holy  Virgin ;  huk  I 
think  it  is  better  to  say  '  the  slave  of  Jesos  in 
Mary/  as  Mr.  Tronson,  superior  general  of  the 
seminary  in  St.  Snlpice,  renowned  for  his  rare 
prudence  and  eonsommate  piety,  eonnselled  to 
an  ecclesiastic  who  consulted  him  on  the  subject. 
The  following  were  the  reasons : 

1.  As  we  are  living  in  an  age  of  intellectual 
pride,  and  there  are  all  round  us  numbers  of 
puffed-up  scholars  and  conceited  and  critical  spi* 
rits,  who  have  plenty  to  say  against  the  best  esta- 
blished and  most  solid  practices  of  piety,  it  is  bet- 
ter for  us  not  to  give  them  any  needless  occasion 
of  criticism.  Hence  it  is  better  for  us  to  say '  the 
slavery  of  Jesus  in  Mary,'  and  to  call  ourselves 
the  slaves  of  Jesus  Christ  rather  than  the  slaves  of 
Mary,  taking  the  denomination  of  our  devotion 
rather  from  its  last  end,  which  is  Jesus  Christ, 
than  from  the  road  and  the  means  to  the  end, 
which  Mary  is ;  though  I  repeat  that  in  truth 
we  may  do  either,  as  I  have  done  myself.  For 
example :  a  man  who  goes  from  Orleans  to  Tours 
by  way  of  Amboise  may  very  well  say  that  he  is 
going  to  Amboise,  or  that  he  is  going  to  Tours ; 
that  he  is  a  traveller  to  Amboise,  and  a  trav^er 
to  Tours ;  with  this  difference  however,  that  Ai&- 
boise  is  but  his  straight  road  to  Tours,  and  that 
Tours  only  is  the  last  end  and  term  of  }m 
voyage. 

2.  A  second  reason  is  because  the  principal 


THS  BUSSED  VIBGIK.  171 

myBtery  we  celebrate  in  honour  of  this  devotion 
i»  the  mystery  of  the  Incarnation,  where  we  can 
<mly  see  Jesus  in  Mary,  and  incarnate  in  her 
bosom.  Hence  it  is  more  to  the  purpose  to 
speak  of  the  slavery  of  Jesus  in  Mary,  and  of 
Jesus  residing  and  reigning  in  Mary,  according 
to  that  beautiftd  prayer  of  so  many  great  men, 
"  O  Jesus,  living  in  Mary,  come  and  live  in  us, 
in  Thy  spirit  of  sanctity,"  Ac 

3.  Another  reason  is  because  this  maimer  of 
speaking  sets  forth  still  more  the  intimate  union 
which  there  is  between  Jesus  and  Mary.  They 
are  so  intimately  united,  that  the  one  is  altogether 
in  the  other.  Jesus  is  altogether  in  Mary,  and 
Mary  is  altogether  in  Jesus ;  or  rather,  she  exists 
no  more,  but  Jesus  is  all  alone  in  her,  and  it  were 
easier  to  separate  the  light  from  the  sun  than 
Mary  from  Jesus.  So  that  we  might  call  om* 
Lord  Jesus  of  Mary  ^  and  our  Blessed  Lady  Jl/oty 
of  Jesus, 

The  time  would  not  permit  me  to  stop  now 
to  explain  the  excellences  and  grandeurs  of  the 
mysteries  of  Jesus  Uving  and  reigning  in  Mary, 
in  other  words,  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Word, 
I  will  content  myself  with  saying  these  three 
words  :  We  have  here  the  first  mystery  of  Jesus 
Oirist, — the  most  hidden,  the  most  exalted, 
and  the  least  known.  It  is  in  this  mystery  that 
Jesus,  in  His  Mother's  womb,  which  is  for  that 
very  reason  called  by  the  Saints  the  cabinet  of 


172  TRUE  DEVOTIOK  TO 

the  secrets  of  Gtxl,  has,  in  concert  with  Mary, 
chosen  all  the  elect  It  is  in  this  mystery  that 
He  has  wrought  all  the  other  mysteries  of  His 
life  by  the  acceptance  which  He  made  of  thenu 
Jesus  ingrediens  mundum  didtj  Ecce  venioj  vtfa" 
dam  voluntatem  tuam.  Consequently  this  mys- 
tery is  an  abridgment  of  all  mysteries,  and 
contains  the  will  and  grace  of  all.  Finally, 
this  mystery  is  the  throne  of  the  mercy,  of  the 
liberality,  and  of  the  glory  of  God.  It  is  the 
throne  of  His  mercy  for  us,  because,  as  we  can- 
not approach  Jesus  but  by  Mary,  we  can  only 
see  Jesus  and  speak  to  Him  by  her  intercession. 
Jesus,  who  always  hears  His  dear  Mother,  al- 
ways grants  His  grace  and  mercy  to  poor  sinners. 
Adeamus  ergo  cumfiducid  ad  thronum  gratioe.  It 
is  the  throne  of  His  liberality  for  Mary,  because, 
while  the  new  Adam  dwelt  in  that  true  ter- 
restrial Paradise,  He  worked  so  many  miracles 
in  secret,  that  neither  Angels  nor  men  can  com- 
prehend them.  It  is  on  this  account  that  the 
Saints  call  Mary  the  magnificence  of  God, — 
Magni/icentia  Deiy — as  if  God  were  only  mag- 
nificent in  Mary :  solummodb  ibi  magnificus  Do^ 
minus.  It  is  the  throne  of  His  glory  for  His 
Father,  because  it  is  in  Mary  that  Jesus  Christ 
has  calmed  His  Father,  irritated  against  men, 
and  that  He  has  made  restitution  of  the  glory 
which  sin  ravished  from  Him,  and  that,  by  the 
sacrifice  He  made  of  His  own  will  and  of  Him« 


THE  BLESSED  VIBGIN.  173 

self,  He  has  given  Him  more  glory  than  ever 
the  sacrifices  of  the  Ancient  Law  could  do,  and 
He  gives  Him  now  an  infinite  glorj^,  which  He 
never  could  have  received  from  man. 

Fifth  Practice,  Those  who  adopt  this  sla- 
very ought  also  to  have  a  great  devotion  to 
saying  the  Hail  Mary  (the  Angelical  Salutation). 
Few  Christians,  however  enlightened,  know  the 
real  price,  merit,  excellence,  and  necessity  of 
the  Hail  Mary.  It  was  necessary  for  the  Blessed 
Virgin  to  appear  several  times  to  great  and  en- 
lightened Saints,  to  show  them  the  merit  of  it. 
She  did  so  to  St.  Dominic,  St.  John  Capistran, 
and  the  Blessed  Alan  de  la  Roche.  They  have 
composed  entire  works  on  the  wonders  and  effi- 
cacy of  that  prayer  for  converting  souls.  They 
have  loudly  published  and  openly  preached  that, 
salvation  having  begun  with  the  Hail  Mary,  the 
salvation  of  each  one  of  us  in  particular  is  attached 
to  that  prayer.  They  tell  us  that  it  is  that  prayer 
which  made  the  dry  and  barren  earth  bring 
forth  the  fruit  of  life;  and  that  it  is  that  prayer 
well  said  which  makes  the  Word  of  God  germi- 
nate in  our  souls,  and  bring  forth  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Fruit  of  Ufe.  They  tell  us  that  the  Hail  Mary 
is  a  heavenly  dew  for  watering  the  earth,  which 
is  the  soul,  to  make  it  bring  forth  its  fruit  in 
season ;  and  that  a  soul  which  is  not  watered  by 
that  prayer  bears  no  fruit,  and  brings  forth  only 
thorns  and  brambles,  and  is  ready  to  be  cursed. 


174  TRUE  PKVOnON  TO 

Listen  to  what  our  Lady  revealed  to  the 
Blessed  Alan  de  la  Soche,  as  he  has  recorded 
it  in  his  book  on  the  dignity  of  the  Rosary  : 
"  Know,  my  son,  and  make  all  others  know, 
that  it  is  a  probable  and  proximate  sign  of  eter- 
nal damnation  to  have  an  aversion,  a  Inkewarm- 
ness,  or  a  negligence,  in  saying  the  Angelical 
Salutation,  which  has  repaired  the  whole  world.*' 
Sdas  enim  et  aecwrh  inteUigaa  et  inde  lath  omnibus 
notum  facias^  quod  videlicet  signum  probabile  est  et 
propinquum  cBtemoe  damnaiionis  horrere  et  acediarij 
ac  negligere  Salutationem  AnffeHcam^  totius  mtmdi 
i'eparationem.  These  are  words  at  once  terrible 
and  consoling,  and  which  we  should  find  it  hard 
to  believe,  if  we  had  not  that  holy  man  for  a 
guarantee,  and  St.  Dominic  before  him,  and 
many  great  men  since.  But  we  have  also  the 
experience  of  several  ages ;  for  it  has  always 
been  remarked  that  those  who  wear  the  outward 
look  of  reprobation,  like  impious  heretics  and 
proud  worldlings,  hate  or  despise  the  Hail  Mary 
or  the  Bosary. 

Heretics  still  learn  and  say  the  Our  Father^ 
but  not  the  Hail  Mary,  nor  the  Bosary.  That 
is  their  horror.  They  would  rather  wear  a  ser- 
p^it  than  a  rosary. 

The  proud  also,  although  Catholics,  have 
the  same  inclinations  as  their  father,  Lucifer; 
and  so  have  only  contempt  or  indifference  for 
the  Hail  Mary^  and  look  at  the  Bosary  as  at  a 


THB  BLESSED  YIBOIK.  175 

derotion  which  is  only  good  for  the  ignorant 
and  for  those  who  cannot  read.  On  the  contrary- 
it  is  an  equally  universal  experience,  that  those 
who  have  otherwise  great  marks  of  predestina- 
tion about  them  love  and  relish  the  Hail  Mary, 
and  delight  in  saying  it.  We  always  see  the 
more  a  man  is  for  God,  the  more  he  likes  that 
prayer.  This  is  what  our  Lady  said  also  to  the 
Blessed  Alan,  after  the  words  which  I  have  re- 
cently quoted.  I  do  not  know  how  it  is,  nor 
why,  but  nevertheless  I  well  know  that  it  is 
true ;  nor  have  I  any  better  secret  of  knowing 
whether  a  person  is  for  God  than  to  examine 
if  he  likes  to  say  the  Hail  Mary  and  the  Rosary. 
I  say,  if  he  likes;  for  it  may  happen  that  a  person 
may  be  under  some  natural  inability  to  say  it,  or 
even  a  supernatural  one;  yet  nevertheless  he  likes 
it  always,  and  always  inspires  the  same  liking 
into  others.  0  predestinate  souls !  slaves  of  Jesus 
in  Mary !  learn  that  the  Hail  Mary  is  the  most 
beautiful  of  all  prayers  after  the  Our  Father. 
It  is  the  most  perfect  compliment  which  you 
can  make  to  Mary,  because  it  is  the  compliment 
which  the  Most  High  sent  her  by  an  archangel, 
in  order  to  gain  her  heart ;  and  it  was  so  power- 
fid  over  her  heart  by  the  secret  charms  of  which 
it  is  so  ftdl,  that  in  spite  of  her  profound  humility, 
ahe  gave  her  consent  to  the  Incarnation  of  the 
Word.  It  is  by  this  compliment  also  that  you  will 
infeUibly  gain  her  heart,  if  you  say  it  as  you  ought* 


176  nxTB  DBYOTunr  to 

Tbe  Hail  Mary  well  said,  that  is,  with  atten- 
tian,  devotion,  and  modesty,  is,  aoooiding  to  the 
Saints,  the  enemy  of  the  devil,  which  puts  him 
to  flight,  and  the  hammer  which  crashes  him. 
It  is  the  sanctification  of  the  sonl,  the  joy  of 
Angels,  the  melody  of  the  predestinate,  the  can- 
ticle of  die  New  Testament,  the  pleasure  of  Mary, 
and  the  glory  of  the  Most  Holy  Trinity.  The 
Hail  Mary  is  a  heavenly  dew  which  fertilises 
the  souL  It  is  the  chaste  and  loving  kiss  which 
we  give  to  Mary.  It  is  a  vermilion  rose  which 
we  present  to  her;  a  precious  pearl  we  offer 
her ;  a  chalice  of  divine  ambrosial  nectar  which 
we  hold  to  her.  All  these  are  comparisons  of 
the  Saints. 

I  pray  you  urgently,  by  the  love  I  bear  you 
in  Jesus  and  Mary,  not  to  content  yourselves 
with  saying  the  Little  Corona  of  the  Blessed 
Virgin,  but  a  whole  Chaplet ;  or  even,  if  you 
have  time,  the  whole  Rosary  every  day.  At 
the  moment  of  your  death,  you  will  bless  the 
day  and  hour  in  which  you  have  followed  my 
advice.  Having  thus  sown  in  the  benedictions 
of  Jesus  and  Mary,  you  will  reap  eternal  bene- 
dictions in  heaven :  qui  seminat  in  benedictiombuSj 
de  benedictixmSms  et  metet. 

Sixth  Practice.  To  thank  God  for  the  graces 
He  has  given  to  our  Lady,  those  who  adopt 
this  devotion  will  often  say  the  Magnificat,  as 
the  Blessed  Mary  d'Oignies  did,  and  many  other 


THE  BLESSED  TIBOIN.  177 

Saints.  It  18  the  only  prayer,  the  only  work, 
which  the  holy  Virgin  composed,  or  rather 
which  Jesus  composed  in  her ;  for  He  spoke  by 
her  mouth.  It  is  the  greatest  sacrifice  of  praise 
which  God  ever  received  from  a  pure  creature  in 
the  law  of  grace.  It  is,  on  the  one  hand,  the  most 
humble  andgrateftd,  and  on  the  other  hand,  the 
most  sublime  and  exalted,  of  all  canticles.  There 
are  in  that  song  mysteries  so  great  and  hidden, 
that  the  Angels  do  not  know  ^em.  The  pious 
and  erudite  Gerson  employed  a  great  part  of 
his  life  in  composing  works  upon  most  difficult 
subjects ;  and  yet  it  was  only  at  the  close  of  his 
career,  and  even  then  with  trembling,  that  he 
undertook  to  comment  on  the  Magnificat,  so  as 
to  crown  all  his  other  works.  He  wrote  a  folio 
volume  on  it,  and  brings  forward  many  admir- 
able things  about  that  beautiftd  and  divine  can- 
ticle. Among  other  things,  he  says  that  our 
Lady  often  repeated  it  herself,  and  especially  for 
tiianksgiving  after  Communion.  The  learned 
Benzonius,  in  explaining  the  same  Magnificat, 
rdates  many  miracles  wrought  by  the  virtue  of 
it,  and  says  that  the  devils  tremble  and  fiy  when 
fliey  hear  these  words:  FecU potentiam  inbrac/do 
8UO^  dispersit  mperbos  mente  cordis  mi 

Seventh  Fractioe.  Those  faithftd  servants  of 
Mary,  who  adopt  this  devotion,  ought  always 
greatly  to  despise,  to  hate,  and  to  eschew  ihe 
corrupted  world,  and  to  make  use  of  those  prac* 


178  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

tices  of  the  contempt  of  the  world  which  we 
have  given  in  the  first  part  of  this  treatise. 

2.  Particular  and  Interior  Prax^icesfor  those  who 
wish  to  he  perfect. 

Besides  the  external  practices  of  the  devotion 
which  we  have  been  describing  so  far,  and  which 
we  must  not  omit  through  negligence  or  con- 
tempt, so  far  as  the  state  and  condition  of  each 
one  will  allow  him  to  observe  them,  there  are 
some  very  sanctifying  interior  practices  for  those 
whom  the  Holy  Ghost  calls  to  high  perfection. 

These  may  be  expressed  in  four  words :  to  do 
all  our  actions  hy  Mary,  icith  Mary,  in  Mary, 
and /or  Mary ;  so  that  we  may  do  them  all  the 
more  perfectly  hy  Jesus,  with  Jesus,  in  Jesus, 
and /or  Jesus. 

I.  We  must  do  our  actions  hy  Mary ;  that  is 
to  say,  we  must  obey  her  in  all  things,  and  in 
aU  things  conduct  ourselves  by  her  spirit,  which 
is  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  Those  who  are  led 
by  the  Spirit  of  God  are  the  children  of  God, — 
Qui  spiritu  Dei  aguntur^  ii  suntfilii  DeL  Those 
who  are  led  by  the  spirit  of  Mary  are  the  children 
of  Mary,  and  consequently  the  children  of  God, 
as  we  have  shown ;  and  among  so  many  clients  of 
the  Blessed  Virgin,  none  are  true  or  faithM  but 
those  who  are  led  by  her  spirit.  I  have  said  that 
the  spirit  of  Mary  was  the  Spirit  of  God,  because 
she  was  never  led  by  her  own  spirit,  but  always 


THS  BLESSED  YXBGIK.  179 

by  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  has  rendered  Himself  so 
completely  master  of  her,  that  He  has  become  her 
own  proper  spirit.  It  is  on  this  accoimt  that  St. 
Ambrose  says :  SU  in  singulis  Marice  anima^  vt 
magnijicet  Dominum;  sit  in  singulis  spiritus  Ma^ 
ricBy  ut  exsuUet  in  Deo^ — "  Let  the  soul  of  Mary 
be  in  each  of  us  to  magnify  the  Lord,  and  the 
spirit  of  Mary  be  in  each  of  us  to  rejoice  in  Qt)d." 
A  soul  is  happy  indeed,  when,  like  the  good  Je- 
suit lay  broiher,  Alphonso  Rodriguez,  who  died 
in  the  odour  of  sanctify,  it  is  all  possessed  and 
over-ruled  by  the  spirit  of  Mary,  a  spirit  meek 
and  strong,  zealous  and  prudent,  hinnble  and 
courageous,  pure  and  profoimd.  Li  order  that 
the  soul  may  let  itself  be  led  by  Mary's  spirit, 
it  must  first  of  aU  renoimce  its  own  spirit,  and 
its  own  proper  lights  and  wills,  before  it  does 
any  thing.  For  example :  it  should  do  so  before 
its  prayer,  before  its  saying  or  hearing  Mass^ 
and  before  communicating;  because  the  darkness 
of  our  own  spirit,  and  the  malice  of  our  own 
will  and  operation,  if  we  follow  them,  however 
good  they  may  appear  to  us,  will  put  an  obstacle 
to  the  spirit  of  Mary.  Secondly,  wo  must  de- 
liver ourselves  to  the  spirit  of  Mary  to  be  moved 
and  influenced  by  it  in  the  manner  she  chooses. 
We  must  put  ourselves  and  leave  ourselves  in 
her  virginal  hands,  like  a  tool  in  the  grasp  of  a 
workman,  like  a  lute  in  the  hands  of  a  skilful 
player.    We  must  lose  ourselves,  and  abandon 


180  TEUB  DBVOTICW  TO 

ourselves  to  her,  like  a  stone  one  throws  into  the 
sea.     This  must  be  done  simply  and  in  an  in- 
stant, by  one  glance  of  the  mind,  by  one  little 
movement  of  the  will,  or  even  verbally,  in  saying, 
for  example,  I  renounce  myself;  I  give  myself 
to  thee,  my  dear  Mother,     We  may  not,  per- 
haps, feel  any  sensible  sweetness  in  this  act  of 
union,  but  it  is  not  on  that  account  the  less  real* 
It  is  just  as  if  we  were  to  say  with  equal  sin- 
ceriiy,  though  without  any  sensible  change  in 
ourselves,  what,  may  it  please  Grod,  we  never 
shall  say,  I  give  myself  to  the  devil;  we  should 
not  the  less  truly  belong  to  the  devil  because  we 
did  not  feel  we  belonged  to  him.     Thirdly,  we 
must,  from  time  to  time,  both  during  and  after 
the  action,  renew  the  same  act  and  offering  of 
imion.     The  more  we  shall  do  so,  the  more  we 
shall  be  sanctified ;  and  we  shall  all  the  sooner 
attain  to  union  with  Jesus  Christ,  which  always 
follows  necessarily  on  our  union  with  Mary, 
because  the  spirit  of  Mary  is  the  spirit  of  Jesus, 
n.  We  must  do  our  actions  vrith  Mary; 
that  is  to  say,  we  must  in  all  our  actions  regard 
Mary  as  an  accompUdied  model  of  every  vurtae 
aiKl  perfection  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  formed 
in  a  pure  creature,  for  us  to  imitate  according 
to  our  litde  measure.     We  nrast  therafi»:e  in 
every  action  consider  how  Mary  has  done  it,  or 
how  she  would  have  done  it,  had  she  been  in  our 
place*     For  that  end  we  must  examine  and 


THB  BLB9SED  YIBOIN.  181 

meditate  the  great  virtues  which  she  practised 
during  her  life,  and  particularly,  first  of  all,  her 
lively  faith,  by  which  she  believed  without  hesi- 
tation the  Angel's  word,  and  beheved  it  faith- 
ftdly  and  constantly  up  to  the  foot  of  the  Cross; 
2dly,  her  profound  humiliiy,  which  made  her 
hide  herself,  hold  her  peace,  submit  to  every 
thing,  and  put  herself  the  last  of  all ;  and  3dly, 
hetr  altogether  divine  puriiy,  which  never  has 
had,  and  never  can  have,  its  equal  under  heaven; 
and  so  on  with  all  her  other  virtues.  Let  us 
remember,  I  repeat  it  for  the  second  time,  that 
Mary  is  the  great  and  exclusive  mould  of  God, 
proper  to  make  living  images  of  God,  at  small 
cost  and  in  a  little  time ;  and  that  a  soul  which 
has  found  that  mould,  and  has  lost  itself  in  it, 
is  presently  changed  into  Jesus  Christ,  whom 
that  mould  represents  to  the  life. 

m.  We  must  do  our  actions  in  Mary.  Tho- 
roughly to  understand  this  practice,  we  must 
know,  first,  that  our  Blessed  Lady  is  the  true 
terreBirial  paradise  of  the  new  Adam,  and  that 
i^  ancient  Paradise  was  but  a  figure  of  her. 
Tbere  are,  then,  in  this  earthly  paradise,  riches, 
badfuties,  rarities,  and  inexplicable  sweetnesses, 
whidi  Jesus  Christ,  the  new  Adam,  had  left 
there  $  it  was  in  this  paradise  that  He  took  His 
complacence  for  nine  months,  worked  His  won- 
ders, and  displayed  His  riches  with  the  magni- 
ficence of  a  Gbd     This  most  holy  place  is  com- 

O 


182  TBUB  DEVOTION  TO 

posed  only  of  a  virgin  and  immaculate  earth, 
of  which  the  new  Adam  was  formed,  and  on 
which  He  was  nourished,  without  any  spot  or 
stain,  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who 
dwelt  there.  It  is  in  this  earthly  paradise  that 
there  is  the  true  tree  of  life,  which  has  borne 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Fruit  of  Kfe,  and  the  tree  of 
the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  which  has  given 
light  unto  the  world.  There  are  in  this  divine 
place  trees  planted  by  the  hand  of  God,  and 
watered  by  His  Divine  unction,  which  have 
borne  and  daily  bear  finiits  of  a  taste  divine. 
There  are  flower-beds,  enamelled  with  beautiftd 
and  various  blossoms ;  virtues,  shedding  odours 
which  embalm  the  very  Angels.  There  are 
meadows  green  with  hope,  impregnable  towers 
of  strength,  and  the  most  enticing  houses 
of  confidence.  .  It  is  but  the  Holy  Ghost  who 
can  make  us  know  the  hidden  truth  of  these 
figures  of  material  things.  There  are  in  this  plaoe 
an  air  of  perfect  purity ;  a  fair  sun,  without 
the  shadow  of  the  Divinity;  a  fair  day,  without 
the  night  of  the  Sacred  Humanity ;  a  continual 
burning  fiimace  of  love,  where  all  the  iron  that 
is  cast  into  it  is  changed,  by  excessive  heat, 
to  gold.  There  is  a  river  of  humility,  which 
springs  from  the  earth,  and  which,  dividing  it- 
self into  four  branches,  waters  all  that  enchanted 
place ;  and  these  are  the  four  cardinal  virtues. 
The  Holy  Ghost,  by  the  mouth  of  the  Fathers, 


tHE  BLESSED  VIBGIN.  183 

also  styles  the  Blessed  Virgin  the  Eastern  Grate, 
by  which  the  High-Priest,  Jesus  Christ,  enters 
the  world  and  leaves  it.  By  it  He  came  the  first 
time,  and  by  it  He  will  come  the  second. 

In  the  next  place,  to  comprehend  thoroughly 
the  practice  of  doing  our  actions  in  Mary,  we  must 
know  that  the  most  holy  Virgin  is  the  Sanctuary 
of  the  Divinity,  the  repose  of  the  Most  Holy 
Trinity,  the  throne  of  God,  the  city  of  God,  the 
altar  of  God,  the  temple  of  God,  the  world  of 
God.  All  these  different  epithets  and  panegyrics 
are  most  substantially  true,  with  reference  to 
the  different  marvels  which  the  Most  High  has 
wrought  in  Mary.  Oh,  what  riches  1  what 
glory  I  what  pleasure  I  what  happiness!  to  be 
able  to  enter  in  and  dwell  in  Mary,  where  the 
Most  High  has  set  up  the  throne  of  His  supreme 
glory  I  But  how  difficult  it  is  for  sinners  like 
ourselves  to  have  the  permission,  the  capacity, 
and  the  light,  to  enter  into  a  place  so  high  and 
so  holy,  which  is  guarded  not  by  one  of  the 
Cherubim,  like  the  old  earthly  Paradise,  but  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  Himself,  who  is  its  absolute 
master  1  He  Himself  has  said  of  it,  Hortus  con- 
clu8ic8y  soror  mea  sponsay  hortua  corwlususy  fom 
aifffiatm;  Mary  is  shut,  Mary  is  sealed.  The 
miserable  children  of  Adam  and  Eve,  driven 
from  the  earthly  Paradise,  cannot  enter  into  this 
one,  except  by  a  particular  grace  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  which  they  ought  to  merit. 


184  TRUE  BEVOnON  TO 

After  we  have  obtained  this  illustrious  grace 
by  our  fidelity,  we  must  remain  in  the  fair  in- 
terior of  Mary  with  complacency,  repose  there 
in  peace,  lean  our  weight  there  in  confidence, 
hide  ourselves  there  with  assurance,  and  lose 
ourselves  there  without  reserve.  Thus,  in  that 
virginal  bosom,  1,  the  soul  shall  be  nourished 
wiih  the  milk  of  grace  and  maternal  mercy ; 
2,  it  shall  be  delivered  from  its  troubles,  fears, 
and  scruples  ;  and,  3,  it  shall  be  in  safety 
against  all  its  enemies, — ^the  world,  the  devil, 
and  sin, — ^who  never  have  an  entrance  there. 
It  is  on  this  account  that  Mary  says  that 
they  who  work  in  her  shall  not  sin :  ^t  ope- 
rantur  in  mey  non  peccabunt;  that  is  to  say, 
those  who  dwell  in  Mary's  spirit  shall  fall  into 
no  considerable  &uli  Lastly,  4,  the  soul  shall 
be  formed  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  Jesus  Christ 
in  it,  because  her  bosom  is,  as  the  holy  Fathers 
say,  the  chamber  of  the  divine  Sacraments, 
where  Jesus  Christ  and  all  the  elect  have  been 
formed. 

IV.  Finally,  we  must  do  all  our  actions /w 
Mary.  As  we  have  given  ourselves  up  entirely 
to  her  service,  it  is  but  just  to  do  every  thing 
for  her,  as  a  servant  and  a  slave.  It*is  not  that 
we.  can  take  her  fer  ihe  last  end  of  our  ser- 
vices, for  that  is  Jesus  Christ  alone;  but  we 
may  take  her  for  our  proximate  end,  our  mys- 
terious means,  and  our  easy  way  to  go  to  Him. 


THE  BLESSED  YIRGIK.  18^ 

like  a  good  servant  and  slave,  we  must  not 
remain  idle,  but,  supported  by  her  protection, 
we  must  undertake  and  achieve  great  things  for 
this  august  sovereign.  We  must  defend  her  pri- 
vileges when  they  are  disputed ;  we  must  stand 
up  for  her  glory  when  it  is  attacked ;  we  must 
entice  all  the  world,  if  we  can,  to  her  service 
and  to  this  true  and  solid  devotion;  we  must 
speak  and  cry  out  against  those  who  abuse  her 
devotion  to  outrage  her  Son,  and  we  must  at 
the  same  time  establish  this  Veritable  Devotion ; 
we  must  pretend  to  no  recompense  for  our  lit- 
tle services,  except  the  honour  of  belonging  to 
so  sweet  a  Queen,  and  the  happiness  of  being 
united  by  her  to  Jesus  her  Son  by  an  indissoluble 
tie  in  time  and  in  eternity. 

Glory  to  Jesus  in  Maiy ! 
Glory  to  Mary  in  Jesus  I 
Glory  to  God  Alone  ! 

MANNER  OF  PRACTISING  THIS  DEVOTION  TO  OUR 
LADY,  WHEN  WE  GO  TO  HOLY  COMMUNION. 

1.  Before  Communimu 

1.  You  must  humble  yourself  most  pro- 
foundly before  God.  2.  You  must  renoimce 
your  corrupt  interior,  and  your  dispositions, 
however  good  your  own  self-love  may  make 
them  look.  3.  You  must  renew  your  conse- 
cration by  saying,  Tmia  toius  ego  mm^  et  omnia 


186  TEUB  DEVOTION  TO 

mea  tua  mnty — I  am  all  thine,  my  dear  Mis- 
tress, with  all  I  have.  4.  You  must  implore  that 
good  Mother  to  lend  you  her  heart,  that  you 
may  receive  her  Son  there  with  the  same  dispo- 
sitions as  her  own.  You  will  represent  to  her 
that  it  touches  her  Son's  glory,  to  be  put  into 
a  heart  so  sullied  and  so  inconstant  as  yours, 
which  would  not  fail  either  to  lessen  His  Glory 
or  to  destroy  it.  But  if  she  will  come  and  dwell 
with  you,  in  order  to  receive  her  Son,  she  can 
do  so  by  the  dominion  which  she  has  over  all 
hearts;  and  her  Son  will  be  well  received  by 
her,  without  stains,  and  without  danger  of  being 
outraged  or  destroyed.  Deits  in  medio  ejiiSy  nan 
commovMtur.  You  will  tell  her  confidently,  that 
all  you  have  given  her  of  your  good  is  a  little 
matter  to  honour  her ;  but  that  by  the  Holy  Com- 
munion you  wish  to  make  her  the  same  present 
as  the  Eternal  Father  gave  her,  and  that  you 
will  honour  her  more  by  that  than  if  you  gave 
her  all  the  goods  in  the  world ;  and,  finally,  that 
Jesus,  who  loves  her  alone,  still  desires  to  take 
His  pleasure  and  His  repose  in  her,  even  in  your 
soul,  though  it  be  filthier  far  and  poorer  than 
the  stable  where  He  made  no  difficulty  to  come, 
simply  because  she  was  there.  You  will  ask  her 
for  her  heart  by  these  tender  words :  Acdpio  te 
in  mea  omnia^  prcebe  mihi  cor  tuum^  0  Maria  ! 


THE  BLESSED  YIB6IN.  187 


2.  At  Communion. 

On  the  point  of  receiving  Jesus  Christ,  after 
the  Our  Father,  you  say  three  times,  Domine 
non  sum  dignus.  Say  the  first  one  to  the  Eternal 
Father,  telling  Him  you  are  not  worthy,  be- 
cause of  your  evil  thoughts  and  ingratitudes 
towards  so  good  a  Father,  to  receive  His  only 
Son ;  but  that  He  is  to  behold  Mary,  His  hand- 
maid,— Ecce  ancilta  Domini^ — who  acts  for  us, 
and  who  gives  us  a  singular  confidence  and 
hope  with  His  Majesty :  Quoniam  singulariter  in 
spe  constituisti  m£. 

You  shall  say  to  the  Son,  Domine  non  sum 
dignus ;  telling  Him  that  you  are  not  worthy  to 
receive  Him,  because  of  your  idle  and  evil 
words,  and  your  infidelity  to  His  service;  but 
that  nevertheless  you  pray  Him  to  have  pity 
upon  you,  that  you  may  introduce  Him  into  the 
house  of  His  Own  Mother,  and  yours,  and  that 
you  will  not  let  Him  go,  without  His  coming  to 
lodge  with  her.  Tenui  eum^  nee  dimittam  donee 
introducam  ilium  in  domum  matris  mecBy  et  in 
cMculum  genitrids  mece  (Cani  iii.  4).  You 
will  pray  Him  to  rise,  and  come  to  the  place  of 
His  repose,  and  into  the  ark  of  His  Sanctifica- 
tion :  Surge^  Domine^  in  requiem  tuam^  tu  et  area 
sanctificationis  tuce.  Tell  Him  you  put  no  con- 
fidence at  all  in  your  own  merits,  your  own 


1 88  TBUB  DEVOTION  TO 

strength,  and  your  own  preparations,  as  Esau 
did ;  but  that  you  trust  only  in  Mary,  your  dear 
Mother,  as  the  little  Jacob  did  in  the  cares  of 
Bebecca.  Tell  Him  that,  sinner  and  Esau  as 
you  are,  you  dare  to  approach  His  Sanctity, 
supported  and  adorned,  as  you  are,  with  the 
virtues  of  His  holy  Mother. 

You  shall  say  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  Domine 
lum  sum  dignm;  telling  Him  that  you  are  not 
worthy  to  receive  this  masterpiece  of  His  charity, 
because  of  the  lukewarmness  and  iniquity  of 
your  actions,  and  because  of  your  resistances  to 
His  inspirations ;  but  that  all  your  confidence 
is  in  Mary,  His  faithfiil  Spouse.  You  shall  say 
with  St.  Bernard,  Hcec  mea  maxima  fiduda^  hcec 
tota  ratio  spei  m^ece.  You  can  pray  even  Him  to 
come  Himself  in  Mary,  His  indissoluble  Spouse, 
telling  Him  that  her  bosom  is  as  pure,  and  h^^ 
heart  as  burning  as  ever ;  and  that  without  His 
descent  into  your  soul  neither  Jesus  nor  Mary 
will  be  formed,  nor  yet  worthily  lodged. 

3.  After  Holy  Communion. 
After  Holy  Communion,  while  you  are  in- 
wardly recollected  and  holding  your  eyes  shut, 
you  will  introduce  Jesus  into  the  heart  of  Mary. 
You  will  give  Him  to  His  Mother,  who  will 
receive  Him  lovingly,  will  place  Him  honour- 
ably, will  adore  Him  profomidly,  will  love  Him 
perfectly,  will  embrace  Him  closely,  and  will 


THE  BLESSED  YIBGIK.  189 

render  to  Him,  in  spirit  and  in  trutii,  many 
homages  which  are  unknown  to  us  in  our  thick 
darkness.  Or  else  you  will  keep  yourself  pro- 
foundly humbled  in  your  heart,  in  the  presence 
of  Jesus  residing  in  Mary.  Or  you  will  sit  like 
a  slave  at  the  gate  of  the  king's  palace,  where 
he  is  speaking  with  the  queen ;  and  while  they 
talk  one  to  the  other  witibout  need  of  you,  you 
will  go  in  spirit  to  heaven  and  over  all  the  earth, 
praying  all  creatures  to  thank,  adore,  and  love 
Jesus  and  Mary  in  your  place :  Venitey  adoremus^ 
venite.  Or  else  you  shall  yourself  ask  of  Jesus, 
in  union  with  Mary,  the  coming  of  His  kingdom 
on  earth,  through  His  holy  Mother;  or  you 
shall  sue  for  the  Divine  wisdom,  or  for  Divine 
love,  or  for  the  pardon  of  your  sins,  or  for  some 
other  grace ;  but  always  iy  Mary  and  in  Mary, 
saying,  while  you  look  aside  at  yourself,  Ne 
respidasy  Dominey  peccata  meay — "  Lord,  look 
not  at  my  sins ;"  Sed  oculi  tui  videant  cequitates 
MaricBy — "  But  let  your  eyes  look  at  nothing  in 
me  but  the  virtues  and  merits  of  Mary :"  and 
then,  remembering  your  sins,  you  shall  add, 
Inimicus  homo  hoc  fedty — "  It  is  I  who  have 
committed  these  sins;"  or  you  shall  say,  Ab 
homine  iniquo  et  dohso  erue  me;  or  else,  Te  opor- 
tet  crescerej  ms  avtem  minuiy — "  My  Jesus,  you 
must  increase  in  my  soul,  and  I  must  decrease ; 
Haiy,  you  muat  increase  within  me,  and  I  must 
be  still  less  than  I  have  been."     CrescUe  et  mtd^ 


190  TRUE  DEVOTION  TO 

tiplicaminiy — "  0  Jesus  and  Mary,  increase  in  me, 
and  multiply  yourselves  outside  in  others  also." 
There  are  an  infinity  of  other  thoughts  wl^ich 
the  Holy  Ghost  furnishes,  and  will  fiimish  you, 
if  you  are  thoroughly  interior,  mortified,  and 
faithfiil  to  this  grand  and  sublime  devotion 
which  I  have  been  teaching  you.  But  always 
remember  that  the  more  you  leave  Mary  to  act 
in  your  Communion,  the  more  Jesus  will  be 
glorified.  The  more  you  leave  Mary  to  act  for 
Jesus,  and  Jesus  to  act  in  Mary,  the  more  pro- 
foundly will  you  humble  yourself,  and  will 
listen  to  them  in  peace  and  silence,  without 
putting  yourself  in  trouble  about  seeing,  tast* 
ing,  or  feeling ;  for  the  just  man  lives  through- 
out on  faith,  and  particularly  in  Holy  Commu- 
nion, which  is  an  action  of  faith.  Justus  mens 
ex  fide  vivit, 

CONSECRATION  OF  OURSELVES  TO  JESUS  CHRIST, 
THE  INCARNATE  WISDOM,  BY  THE  HANDS  OF 
MARY. 

0  Eternal  and  Incarnate  Wisdom!  O 
sweetest  and  most  Adorable  Jesus  1  True  God 
and  True  Man,  only  Son  of  the  Eternal  Father, 
and  of  Mary  always  Virgin  I  I  adore  Thee  pro- 
foundly in  the  bosom  and  splendours  of  Thy 
Father  during  etemiiy ;  and  I  adore  Thee  also  in 
the  Virginal  bosom  of  Mary,  Thy  most  worthy 
Mother,  in  the  time  of  Thine  Incarnation. 


THE  BLESSED  YIBQIN.  191 

I  give  Thee  thanks  for  that  Thou  hast 
annihilated  Thyself,  in  taking  the  form  of  a 
slave,  in  order  to  rescue  me  from  the  cruel 
slavery  of  the  devil.  I  praise  and  glorify  Thee 
for  that  Thou  hast  been  pleased  to  submit  Thy- 
self to  Mary,  Thy  holy  Mother,  in  all  things, 
in  order  to  make  me  Thy  faithful  slave  through 
her.  But,  alas!  imgratefrd  and  faithless  as  I 
have  been,  I  have  not  kept  the  promises  which 
I  made  so  solenmly  to  Thee  in  my  Baptism ;  I 
have  not  fulfilled  my  obligations;  I  do  not 
deserve  to  be  called  Thy  son,  nor  yet  Thy  slave; 
and  as  there  is  nothing  in  me  which  does  not 
merit  Thine  anger  and  Thy  repulse,  I  dare  no 
more  come  by  myself  before  Thy  Most  Holy 
and  August  Majesfy.  It  is  on  this  account  that 
I  have  recourse  to  the  intercession  of  Thy  most 
holy  Mother,  whom  Thou  hast  given  me  for  a 
mediatrix  with  Thee.  It  is  by  her  means  that 
I  hope  to  obtain  of  Thee  contrition,  and  the 
pardon  of  my  sins,  the  acquisition  and  the  pre- 
servation of  wisdom.  I  salute  thee,  then,  0 
immaculate  Mary,  living  tabernacle  of  the  Di- 
vinity, where  the  Eternal  Wisdom  willed  to  be 
hidden,  and  to  be  adored  by  Angels  and  by  men. 
I  hail  thee,  0  Queen  of  heaven  and  earth,  to 
whose  empire  every  thing  is  subject  which  is 
under  Glt)d. 

I  salute  thee,  0  sure  refuge  of  sinners, 
whose  mercy  fails  to  no  one.     Hear  the  de- 


1 92  TBUB  DEVOTION  TO 

sires  which  I  have  of  the  Divine  Wisdom ;  and 
for  that  end  receive  the  vows  and  offeringB 
which  my  lowness  presents  to  thee.  I,  N.,  a 
faithless  sinner, — I  renew  and  ratify  to-day  in 
thy  hands  the  vows  of  my  Baptism ;  I  renounce 
for  ever  Satan,  his  pomps  and  works ;  and  I 
give  myself  entirely  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  Incar- 
nate Wisdom,  to  carry  my  cross  after  Him  all 
the  days  of  my  life,  and  to  be  more  &ithiul  to 
Him  than  I  have  ever  been  before. 

In  the  presence  of  aU  the  heavenly  court  I 
choose  thee  this  day  for  my  Mother  and  Mis- 
tress. I  deliver  and  consecrate  to  thee,  as  thy 
slave,  my  body  and  soul,  my  goods,  both  in- 
terior and  exterior,  and  even  the  value  of  all  my 
good  actions,  past,  present,  and  ftiture ;  leaving 
to  you  the  entire  and  ftdl  right  of  disposing  of 
me,  and  all  that  belongs  to  me,  without  excep- 
tion, according  to  thy  good  pleasure,  to  the 
greatest  glory  of  God,  in  time  and  in  eternity. 

Receive,  0  benignant  Virgin,  this  litde 
ofiFering  of  my  slavery,  in  the  honour  of,  and  in 
union  with,  that  subjection  which  the  Et^mal 
Wisdom  deigned  to  have  to  thy  Maternity,  in 
homage  to  the  power  which  both  of  you  have 
over  this  little  worm  and  miserable  dnner,  and 
in  thanksgiving  for  the  privileges  with  whidi 
the  Holy  Trinity  hath  favoured  thee,  I  protest 
that  I  wish  henceforth,  as  thy  true  slave,  to 
seek  thy  honour  and  to  obey  thee  in  aU  things. 


THE  BLESSED  VIBGIN.  193 

0  admirable  Mother,  present  me  to  thy 
dear  Son  as  His  eternal  slave,  so  that  as  He 
hath  redeemed  me  by  thee,  by  thee  He  may 
receive  me.  0  Mother  of  mercy,  get  me  the 
grace  to  obtain  the  true  Wisdom  of  God ;  and 
for  that  end  put  me  in  the  number  of  those 
whom  thou  lovest,  whom  thou  teachest,  whom 
thou  conductest,  and  whom  thou  nourishest  and 
protectest,  as  thy  children  and  thy  slaves. 

0  faithful  Virgin,  make  me  in  all  things  so 
perfect  a  disciple,  imitator,  and  slave  of  the 
Incarnate  Wisdom,  Jesus  Christ  thy  Son,  that 
I  may  attain,  by  thy  intercession,  and  by  thy 
example,  to  the  fulness  of  His  age  on  earth, 
and  of  His  glory  in  the  heavens.     Amen. 

Qui  potest  capere,  capiat. 
Quis  sapiens,  et  intelliget  hsBC  ? 


THE  END. 


londok: 

pBnmn>  bt  liyit,  robson,  aitd  nuHKLnr, 

Ctareat  New  Street  and  Fetter  Laae. 


