
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



The 

Spiritual 

■i- QOTABAV ••■ 




Hiitacs of Spiritual motka for 
T^ Spiritual Combat 



11 




RIVINGTONS 

l/OnUon Waterloo Place 

^X&rt High Street 

CambriUge Trinity Street 

{All rights reserved) 



[A-n4l 

-it 



\' 



7 



Library of Spiritual Works 

FOR 

English Catholics 

THE 

spiritual Cumiat 

TOGBTHBR WITH 

THE SUPPLEMENT 

AND 

THE PATH OF PARADISE 



BY 




Laurence Scup 



A New Translation 

RIVINGTONS 

Hontjon, DjcfoiD, anH CambriDce 

MDCCCLXXV 




T 



\ 



CONTENTS 

Chap. pagb 

I. In what Christian Perfection consists; and that the 
attainment of it involves a struggle, and of four 
things necessary for this conflict . . . x 

II. Of Distrust of ourselves ..... 8 

III. Of Trust in God 12 

IV. How we may know whether we are acting with self- 

distrust and Trust in God . . . .15 

V. Of the mistake of many, who hold Timidity for a 

Virtue . 16 

VI. Further advice as to obtaining this Distrust of self 

and Trust in God ..... 17 

VII. Of Spiritual Exercise; and first of the Exercise of the 
Understanding, which must be preserved from 
Ignorance and Curiosity . . . .19 

VIII. Of the Hindrances to a right Discernment of things, 
and of the course which we should take in order to 
Judge truly concerning them . . .21 

IX. Of another thing from which the Understanding must 
be preserved in order to exercise a Right Judg- 
ment ....... 24 

X. Of the Exercise of the Will, and of the End to which 
all our Actions, both inward and outward, should 
be directed ...... 27 



7 



VI CONTENTS 



Chap. page 

XI, Of some Considerations which may induce the Will 

to seek in all things the Good Pleasure of God . 33 
XII. Of the divers Wills which are in Man, and of the 

Warfare between them . . . • 34 

XIII. Of the way to resist the Sensual Impulses, and of the 
Acts to be performed by the Will, in order to 
acquire Habits of Virtue . . . • 38 

XIV. What ought to be done when the higher Will seems 
to be wholly overcome and stifled by the lower 
Will, and by its Enemies . . .45 

XV. Some Suggestions about the manner of Fighting ; 
and especially against what Enemies, and with 
what Virtues, we should contend . . -48 

XVI. In what way the Soldier of Christ should take the 

Field early in the Morning . . . .51 

XVII. Of the order to be observed in the Conflict with our 

Evil Passions . . . . -54 

XVIII. Of the way to overcome Sudden Risings of the 

Passions . . . . . -55 

XIX. How to resist the Lusts of the Flesh ... 57 
XX. Of the way to overcome Sloth ... 64 

XXI. Of the Guard of the Outward Senses, and how from 
these we may pass to the Contemplation of the 
Divinity ...... 70 

XXII. How the same things may offer us opportunities of 
regulating our Senses by passing on to Meditation 
on the Incarnate Word, in the Mysteries of His 
Life and Passion ..... 74 

XXIII. Of other ways of Governing our Senses according to 

the different occasions which happen . 77 

XXIV. How to rule the Tongue .... 83 
XXV. That the Soldier of Christ, if he would be successful 



T 



j 



CONTENTS VU 

Chap. page 

against his Enemies, must, as far as possible, 
lay aside all Agitation and Anxiety of Mind . 86 
XXVI. What we must do when we are Wounded . . 91 

XXVII. Of the order which the Devil observes in his 
Assaults and Stratagems against those who give 
themselves to a Holy Life, and against those 
who are already found in the Bondage of Sin . 94 
XXVIII. Of the Assaults and Devices which the Devil em- 
ploys against those who are held in the Bond- 
age of Sin ..... 95 
XXIX. Of the Wiles and Delusions by which the Devil 
holds captive those who are conscious of their 
Misery, and desire to be free ; and how it is 
our Resolutions are so often fruitless . . 96 
XXX. Of the Delusion of those who imagine that they 

are going on to Perfection . . -99 

XXXI. Of the Devil's Deceits and Struggles to draw us 

away from the Path of Perfection . . loi 

XXXII. Of the last above-named Assault and Stratagem, 
whereby the Devil tries to make the Virtues we 
have acquired the Occasions of our Ruin . 106 

XXXIII. Of certain Suggestions for overcoming our evil 

Passions, and gaining new Virtues . . Z15 

XXXIV. That Virtues are to be gained by degrees ; by 

Exercising ourselves in their gradual forma- 
tion, and that our Attention must first be given 
to one step, and then to another . .1x9 

XXXV. Of the means by which Virtues are acquired, and 
of the way we should Use them, allowing 
some space of Time to one Virtue only . xai 

XXXVI. That in the Exercise of Virtue we must continually 

Advance with Diligence . . .124 

XXXVII. That as we must always continue in the Exercise 



4 



I 



VUl CONTENTS 

Chap. page 

of the Virtues, so we must not shun any oppor- 
tunity which offers itself for their Attainment 1 26 
XXXVIII. That we ought to regard as precious every Oppor- 
tunity which is afforded to us for the Acquisi- 
tion of Virtues ; and chiefly those which pre- 
sent the greatest Difficulties • . .128 
XXXIX. How to avail ourselves of the various Occasions 
which present themselves for the Exercise of 
a single Virtue . . . . •131 
XL. Of the length of time to be given to the Exercise 
of each i>articular Virtue, and of the marks of 
Spiritual Advancement . . • X33 
XLI. That we must not yield to the wish to be rid of 
the Trials which we are bearing patiently ; 
and how we should rule all our Desires so as 
to grow in Holiness . . . .136 
XLII. How to resist the Devil, when he tries to ensnare 

us by an indiscreet Zeal . . .13^ 

XLIII. Of the Power of our Evil Inclinations, and of the 
Way the Devil tempts us to form rash Judg- 
ments of our Neighbour, and how to resist lum T41 

XLIV. OfPrayer 144 

XLV. What is Mental Prayer . . . .150 

XLVI. Of Meditation . . . . .152 

XLVII. Of another mode of Praying by way of Meditation 154 
XLVIII. Of a mode of Praying by means of the Blessed 

Virgin Mary . . . . • 155 

XLIX. Of certain Considerations as to Faith and Con- 
fidence in the Prayers of the Virgin Mary 157 
L. Of a way of Meditating and Praying by means 

of the Angels and of all the Blessed . .159 

LI. Of Meditation on the Passion of Christ, in order 

to excite various Affections . i6x 



=# 



\ 



(X>irTENTS IX 



Chap. pagb 

LI I. Of the Advantages which may be derived from 
Meditation on the Crucifixion of our Lord, and 
of the Imiution of His Virtues . . . z68 

LIIL Of the most ^oly Sacram^t of the Eucharist 174 

LIV. Of the way we ought to Receive the most Holy 

Sacrament of the Eucharist . • ^75 

LV. Howwc ought to Prepare ourselves for Communion 

in order to excite within us Love . • Z79 

LVI. Of Spiritual Communion . . . x88 

LVIl. Of retumuig Thanks . .190 

LVIir. Of Oblation 191 

LIX. Of Sensible Devotion and of Dryness . . .195 

LX. Of the Examination, of Conscience . . aoi 

LXL How in this Battle we have need of continuing the 

Struggle even unto Death .... aoa 
LXn. How to prepare ourselves against the Enemies who 

assault us when we are Dying . . . 204 

LXIIL Of four Assaults of our Enemies at the time of Dying : 
and first of the Assault upon Faith, and of the 
manner of defending ourselves . . . 906 

LXIV. Of the Assault of Despair, and of its Remedy . 207 

LXV. Of the Assault of Vain-glory ... .909 

LXVI. Of the Assanlt of Illusions and false Appearances at 

the Point of Death . . . . . ato 



4&upplement to tS)e ^^pititusl Comliat 

I. What is the Nature of Christian Perfection . • ai5 

II. Of the Necessity of a Conflict in order to gain Chris- 

tifui Perfection . . . . . at6 



7 



CONTENTS 



Qmkv. 

III. Of Three Things which are needful for the Young 

Soldier of Christ . . . . . 

IV. Of Resistance and Violence, and of the Art of using 

them ...... 

V. That we have need to Watch continually over our 
Will, so as to discover the i5articular Passion to 
which it inclines ..... 
VI. How by removing the first Passion, which is Love of 
the Creature and of Self, and by giving it to God, 
all the rest will be well regulated and ordered 
VII. That the Human Will stands in need of Succour 
VIII. How the Will of Man is greatly strengthened by over- 
coming the World .... 
IX. Of the Second Help to the Will 
X. Of Temptations to Spiritual Pride 
XI. Of the Third Help of the Human Will 
XII. In what Way a Man may gain the Habit of keeping 
in the Presence of God, whenever he will 
XIII. Some Advice about Prayer 
XIV. Of another way of Praying 
XV. Of the Fourth Help of the Human Will 
XVI. Of Meditation on the Being of God . 
XVII. Of Meditation on the Power of God . 
XVIII. Of Meditation on the Wisdom of God 
XIX. Of Meditation on the Goodness of God 
XX. Of MediUtion on the Beauty of God . 
XXI. What God has done for Man, and with what love 
and what He would further do for him, if need- 
ful 

XXII. What God does every Day for Man . 
XXIII. How great is the Goodness of our God in waiting 
for and bearing with the Sinner . 



PAGE 
2X6 

217 



220 
222 

223 
225 
227 
228 

229 
231 
233 
233 
234 
23s 
236 
237 
237 



238 
239 

239 



T 



CONTENTS 



XI 



Chap. page 

XXIV. What God will do in another Life, not only for 

him who has always served Him, but also for 

the converted Sinner .... 240 

XXV. Of the Fifth Help of the Human Will . 343 

XXVI. In what Way Self-love may be discovered . 343 

XXVII. Of the Sixth Help 346 

XXVIII. Of Sacramental Communion . . 348 

XXIX Of Sacramental Confession . 249 

XXX. How to overcome the Impure Passion . 251 

XXXI. How many things should be avoided, so as not to 

fall into the Vice of Impurity . . 353 

XXXII. What we should do when we have fallen into this 

Sin of Impurity .... 254 

XXXIII. Of some Motives which should lead the Sinner to 

turn to God without delay . . . 355 

XXXIV. How to obtain the Gift of Tears for our Offences 

against God, and Conversion . . . 358 

XXXV. Of some Reasons why Men live without Weeping 

for their Offences against God, without 

Virtues, and without Christian Perfection . 360 

XXXVI. Of Love towards Enemies . . .263 

XXXVII. Of Examination of Conscience . .265 

XXXVI IL Of Two Rules for Living in Peace . .267 



fl>f JIntetiot Peace, or tte Patlft to Paranfue 



7 



I. What is the Nature of our Heart, and how it 

ought to be Governed . . 27T 

II. Of the Care we should have to preserve a Peaceful 

Spirit ...... 272 



\ 



T 



XU CONTENTS 

Chap. pack 

III. How this BuUding of Inward Peace must be gradually 

constructed . . . . . .274 

IV.. How the Soul must refuse all Consolations, for this is 
true Humility and poverty of Spirit, by which 
Interior Peace is acquired .... 375 

V. How the Soul should keep herself in a state of inward 

Solitude, that God may work within her . . 378 

VI. Of the Prudence which we ought to exercise in the 
Love of our Neighbour, so as not to disturb this 
Peace ....... 280 

VII. How the Soul, despoiled of its own Will, must present 

itself before God ..... 283 

VIII. Of the Faith we should have in the most Holy Sacra- 
ment of the Altar, and how we should offer our- 
selves unto the Lord . . . . . 287 

IX. That we ought not to seek Pleasures, nor the Things 

which gratify our Tastes ; but God Alone . . 288 

X. That the Servant of God must not be discouraged, 
though he feel within himself some Repugnance 
and Disquiet as to this Peace . . . 290 

XI. Of the Diligence which the Devil employs to disturb 
this Peace, and how we ought to guard ourselves 
against his Devices ..'... 392 
XII. That the Soul ought not to disquiet itself on accoimt of 

Inward Trials ..... 396 

XI II. That Temptations are sent us by God for our good . 398 

XIV. Of the Remedy which we ought to use, so as not to be 

disquieted under Faults and Infirmities . '303 

XV. How the Soul, without loss of Time, should recover 

Calmness, and make Progress . . 306 



\ 



i 



CHAPTER I. 

3In tol^at Cl^rijsitian IPerfection con0i0t0 ; anti tliat tide 
attainment of it inijotbeji a 0trufi:fflc, anU of four 
tl^itts^ necejSiaiatp for tl^i^ conflict. 

IF you wish, beloved in Christ, to reach the 
height of perfection, and by drawing near 
to your God to become one spirit with Him, 
(and no aim can be imagined or expressed which 
is greater, or nobler than this,) you must before 
all else gain a true idea of what constitutes 
genuine spiritual perfection. 

There are many who have believed it to 
consist exclusively in outward mortification, in 
hair-shirts and disciplines, in long watchings 
and fastings, and in other bodily sufferings and 
chastisements. 

Others again, and especially women, think 
that they have reached the climax of perfection, 
when they say many prayers, attend many 
services and offices, and are regularly at Church 
and at Communion. 

Some indeed, (and amongst this class not a 
few Religious persons who have withdrawn 
themselves from the world,) persuade themselves 



T 




OF CHRISTIAN PERFECTION 



that perfection entirely depends on the regular 
attendance at the Hours of prayer, on silence, ! 
solitude, and exact observance of Rule. i 

And thus, some in these, and others in those i 
external actions suppose perfection to consist. , 
But they are all deceived. For although these i 
practices are sometimes means of gaining the I 
spirit of perfection, and sometimes are its fruits, ! 
yet in no sense can it ever be said that true | 
spiritual perfection consists in these. 

Unquestionably they are means most effica- 
cious for obtaining spirituality, when they are 
properly and discreetly employed ; for by them 
we gain strength against our own sinfulness and 
frailty, we are fortified against the assaults and 
snares of our common enemies, and, in short, 
are provided with those spiritual helps, which ' 
are necessary to all the servants of God, and i 
especially to those who have but lately entered | 
His service. I 

They are also fruits of the Spirit in truly spiri- | 
tual persons, who "keep under" the body because 
it has offended its Maker, and in order to keep it 
low and submissive to His commands : in those i 
who live m solitude and silence in order to avoid 
even the least occasions of sin, and to have their ' 
conversation in Heaven, and who give them- \ 
selves entirely to the Service of God and to 
works of mercy; who pray, and meditate upon 



OF CHRISTIAN PERFECTION 



1 



the Life and Passion of Jesus Christ, not for 
the sake of curiosity and devotional feeb'ng, but 
that they may gain deeper knowledge of their 
own corruptness and of God's Mercy and Good- 
ness, and that they may be more and more 
inflamed with the love of God, and the hatred 
of themselves — following the Son of God by self- 
denial, and by taking the Cross upon their 
shoulders; who frequent the Holy Sacraments 
with the view of glorifying the Divine Majesty, 
that they may be more closely united with 
God, and gain fresh strength against their 
enemies. 

To others, however, who found perfection 
entirely on external practices, such works may 
bring greater ruin than open sins; not that these 
works are bad in themselves, for in themselves 
they are very good, but in consequence of the 
mistaken use which is made of them they have 
this sad result; because those who practise 
them are so wrapt up in what they do, that 
they leave their hearts a prey to their own evil 
inclinations and to the devices of Satan. He 
sees them wandering from the right path, and 
not only does he leave them to the enjoyment 
of these exercises, but lets them vainly fancy that 
they are roaming amidst the delights of Para- 
dise, and persuade themselves that they are 
borne upwards even to the angelic choirs, and 




OF CHRISTIAN PERFECTION 



T 



that they feel the Presence of God within them. 
Such persons sometimes are so absorbed in 
curious, deep, delightful thoughts, that they 
become as it were oblivious of the world and of 
all creatures, and appear to themselves rapt even 
to the third heaven. 

But in how great an error these persons have 
entangled themselves, and how far they are 
distant from that true perfection which we seek, 
may easily be gathered from their lives and 
conversation. For in everything, whether it be 
great or small, they seek their own advantage, 
and like to be preferred before others ; they are 
self-willed and opinionated, blind to their own 
faults, sharp-sighted for the faults of others, and 
severely condemn the sayings and doings of 
other men. 

But if you touch only with your finger a certain 
vain reputation in which they hold themselves, 
and are pleased to be held by others ; if you bid 
them discontinue any of their regular and formal 
devotions, they are at once angry and exceed- 
ingly disturbed. 

And if God Himself visits them with trials 
and infirmities, (which never come without His 
appointment or permission, and which are the 
tests of His servants' faithfulness,) or if He per- 
mits them to be sorely persecuted in order that 
they may gain a true knowledge of themselves. 






OF CHRISTIAN PERFECTION 5 

and be brought back to the way of true perfec- 
tion, immediately the false foundation is dis- 
covered, and the miserable condition of the 
proud heart is seen. For in all events, whether 
adverse or prosperous, they are unwilling to be 
resigned and to humble themselves under the 
mighty hand of God, acquiescing in His just 
though hidden judgments ; neither will they, in 
imitation of the most lowly and patient Son of 
God, abase themselves below all creatures, and 
love their persecutors and enemies as dear friends, 
because they are the instruments of Divine 
Goodness, and work together for their mortifica- 
tion, perfection and salvation. 

It is therefore quite evident, that all such 
persons are in great danger. For since the 
inward eye is darkened, by which they see them- 
selves and their outward actions which are good, 
they attribute to themselves a high degree of 
perfection, and so, becoming more and more 
puffed up, they readily pass judgment upon 
others; yet they themselves need a special 
miracle of grace to convert them, for nothing 
short of that would have effect. It is more easy 
to convert and bring back an open sinner to the 
path of truth, than the man whose sin is hidden 
and mantled with the semblance of virtue. 

You clearly and distinctly see, then, from 
what I have said, that the essence of the spiri- 



7 




OF CHRISTIAN PERFECTION 



T 



tual life does not lie in any of those things to ' 

which I have alluded. It consists in nothing ' 

else but the knowledge of the Divine Goodness ' 

and Greatness, of our own nothingness, and ' 

proneness to all evil ; in the love of God and ' 

the hatred of self; in entire subjection not only ' 

to God Himself, but for the love of Him, to all i 

creatures ; in giving up our own will, and in i 

completely resigning ourselves to the Divine I 

Pleasure ; moreover, in willing and doing all this j 

with no other wish or aim than the glory and | 

honour of God, the fulfilment of His Will because j 

it is His Will, and because He deserves to be | 

served and loved. I 

This is the law of love engraven on the hearts \ 

of His faithful servants by the band of the Lord | 

Himself. | 

This is the self-denial which is required of us. ' 

This is His sweet yoke and light burden. ! 

This is that obedience to which our Redeemer ' 
and Master calls us, both by word and example. 

But if you aspire to such a pitch of perfection, 
you must daily do violence to yourself, by cour- 
ageously attacking and destroying all your evil ! 
desires and affections. In great matters as well ; 
as in small, it is necessary, then, that you prepare 
yourself and hold yourself in readiness for this 
conflict, for he only will be crowned who was 
brave in the battle. 



r 

\ 



■ir^ 



7 



OF CHRISTIAN PERFECTION 



Doubtless this is the hardest of all struggles, 
because by fighting against ourselves, we are, at 
the same time, attacked by ourselves, and on 
that account the victory obtained in such a 
conflict will be of all others the most glorious 
and most dear to God. 

Therefore, if you used every endeavour to 
mortify yourself, and to tread down your inordi- 
nate aflfections, inclinations, and rebellious pas- 
sions, even in the smallest matters, you would be 
i:endering to God a far greater and more accept- 
able service, than if whilst permitting some of 
your inclinations to remain unmortified, you 
scourged yourself until you bled, fasted more 
rigorously, and practised an austerity greater 
than that of the hermits and saints of the desert, 
or converted souls by thousands. 

For, although in itself the conversion of souls 
is dearer to God than the mortification of an 
irregular desire, yet it is not your duty to will 
and perform that which is in itself more excellent, 
but that which God before all else strictly desires 
and requires of you. For He doubtless seeks 
and desires of you self-conquest, and the thorough 
mortification of your passions, rather than that 
.you, wilfully leaving one of them alive in you, 
should perform in some other direction some 
greater and more notable service for His sake. 

Now you see wherein the real perfection of a 






8 OF DISTRUST OF OURSELVES 

Christian lies, and that to obtain it you must 
enter upon a constant and sharp warfare against 
self; you must provide yourself with four very 
safe and highly necessary weapons, that you may 
win the palm, and be finally a conqueror in this 
spiritual conflict — these are, 

Distrust of self .... I. 

Trust in God II. 

Spiritual Exercises . . . III. 

Prayer IV. 

Concerning all these, with God's help, we 
intend plainly and briefly to treat. 

CHAPTER II. j 

Df Di0tru0t of 2Dur0e{t>e0. 

I 

DISTRUST of yourself is so necessary in I 

the spiritual combat, that without it you | 

may be assured that you will neither gain the ' 
desired victory, nor be able to overcome even 

the weakest of your passions. You must be \ 

firmly convinced in your mind that this is the ' 

case, for we are too prone through our natural i 

corruption to make a false estimate of ourselves ; , 

so that, though we are absolutely nothing, we j 

persuade ourselves that we are something, and i 
presume without the slightest foundation on our 

own strength. \ 



-f 



--X~ 



OF DISTRUST OF OURSELVES 



This fault is one which it is not easy to dis- 
cover, yet it is very offensive in the sight of God. 
For He desires and loves to see in us a loyal 
acknowledgment of this most certain truth, that 
He Alone is the Source of all good, and that all 
virtue and grace descend from Him to us, and 
that from ourselves nothing can come, not even 
a good thought, which would be worthy of His 
approval. 

Yet, although this most necessary self-distrust 
is itself the work of the Divine Hand, and is 
wont to be bestowed by God upon His friends, 
sometimes by means of holy inspirations, some- 
times by sharp chastisements, sometimes by 
violent and almost insurmountable temptations, 
at other times by ways not understood by us, 
nevertheless it is His will that we also, as far as 
we can, should do our part; I will therefore 
propose to you four means, by which, relying 
chiefly on God's assistance, you may be able to 
acquire self-distrust. 

The first is, to meditate upon and to recognize 
your own vileness and nothingness, and the fact 
that of yourself you can do no good thing, where- 
by to deserve an entrance into the Heavenly 
Kingdom. 

The second is, to seek from the Lord with 
fervent and humble prayers this self-distrust; 
seeing it is His gift. In order to obtain it, you 




OF DISTRUST OF OURSELVES 



must not only acknowledge that you are desti- 
tute of it, but also that you are wholly unable of 
yourself to gain it. 

In this way, present yourself again and again 
before the Divine Majesty, with the assurance 
that of His goodness He will grant your request; 
endure the delay, however long, which His 
providence may appoint, and persevere; and 
without doubt you shall obtain it. 

The third is, to live in continual fear of your- 
self, of your own judgment, of your great prone- 
ness to sin ; and of the countless enemies, against 
whom you are of yourself utterly powerless, of 
their great experience in this warfare, their wiles, 
their capability of transforming themselves into 
angels of light, their innumerable snares and 
traps which they secretly spread in the very way 
itself of holiness. 

The fourth is, that as soon as you have had 
any fall, you should enter at once more deeply 
and more consciously into the consideration of 
your own feebleness. It was for this purpose God 
permitted you to fall, that, being warned in- 
wardly by inspiration, by a clearer light than 
before, you might, knowing yourself well, learn 
to despise yourself, and to regard yourself as 
something vile and of no account, and to be 
willing that others should view you in the same 
light. Otherwise you will never attain to a 



i 



\ 



OF DISTRUST OF OURSELVES 



1 



virtuous self-distrust, which is based on genuine 
humility and experimental self-knowledge, such 
as that we have spoken of. 

This self-knowledge is clearly necessary for 
any one who seeks to have union with the 
supreme Light and uncreated Truth, and this 
the Divine Mercy teaches to the proud and to 
the presumptuous commonly through their falls ; 
suffering them to fall into some sin, which they 
thought there was no chance of their doing, 
so that, gaining in this experimental way self- 
knowledge, they may learn to distrust themselves 
in every respect. 

But the Lord has not recourse to so miserable 
a remedy as this, until milder means have been 
tried, and have failed to work all the good the 
Divine goodness had in view. 

He permits a man to fall more or less in pro- 
portion to his pride and self-esteem ; so that if 
there were no presumption, (as in the case of the 
Blessed Virgin Mary,) there would be no fall. 

Therefore, when you happen to have a fall, 
betake yourself at once to the humble considera- 
tion of what you are, and earnestly seek from 
the Lord th© true Light whereby you may know 
yourself, and entirely distrust yourself, if you, 
do not want to fall again, and perhaps the next 
time into deeper sin. 



OF TR UST IN GOD 



t 



CHAPTER III. 

ALTHOUGH, as we have said, self-distrust 
is essential for this spiritual combat, 
nevertheless it alone would not be enough, for 
then we should fly from our enemies or be 
overcome by them. There is need to add 
to it perfect trust in God, in the hope and 
expectation that He Alone will vouchsafe to 
us every good thing we need — His help, and the 
victory. 

From ourselves indeed, who are nothing, we 
can expect nothing but falls, for which cause we 
ought entirely to distrust ourselves; but, with 
the help of our Lord, we may be assured of 
success at all times; provided that to obtain 
His aid, we arm our hearts with a lively con- 
fidence in Him. Four means will help us to 
gain this. 

First, by beseeching God to grant it to us. 

Secondly, by keeping thq eye of faith fixed on 
the immense Power and infinite Wisdom of God, 
with Whom nothing is either impossible or 
difficult; by considering that His Goodness is 
unbounded, and that His willingness and desire 
to give, each hour and moment, whatever may be 



W 



OF TRUST IN GOD 1 3 

needful for the spiritual life and for the entire 
mastery over self, is unbounded, if we with trust- 
fulness fly for refuge to His arras. 

For if our Divine Shepherd for thirty-three 
years followed after His lost sheep, with cries so 
piercing that His voice grew hoarse, through a 
road so rough and thorny that He shed all His 
blood upon it, and laid down His life, will He 
not now — ^when the poor sheep follows Him by 
obeying His commands, or at least with the 
desire of doing so (though sometimes feeble), 
when it calls upon Him and entreats Him, will 
He not now cast upon it the life-giving glance 
of His Countenance, hear its cry, lay it upon 
His Divine Shoulders, rejoicing with all His 
neighbours and with the Angels of Heaven ? 

For if our Lord in His love spared no pains 
in order to find the blind and dumb sinner, the 
lost coin of the Gospel, is it possible that He 
would turn away from one who, like a lost sheep, 
calls and cries piteously after the shepherd ? 

And can it be imagined, that God, Who knocks 
continually at the door of man's heart, that He 
might enter in and sup there, and communicate 
His gifts, would, when invited by man to enter 
into that heart, turn a deaf ear, and refuse to 
come in ? 

The third way of gaining this holy confidence 
in God, is to recall the truths of Holy Scripture 



7 



j 14 OF TRUST IN GOD 



-t 



where it will be plainly seen in so many places, 
that no one who trusted in God has ever been 
brought to confusion. 

The fourth means is this, (and this will serve 
both to acquire distrust of self, as well as trust 
in God,) — when any thing occurs to be done, or 
some struggle with self has to be met, and you 
desire to overcome yourself, before you propose 
or make any resolution, consider first your own 
weakness; then, full of self-distrust, turn to the 
Divine Power, Wisdom and Goodness, and in 
reliance upon these, commence the action or 
conflict with fearlessness. Armed with these 
weapons, and with prayer (of which I shall speak 
presently), go forth to battle and to action. 

Unless you observe this order, though you 
may think you are acting in reliance upon God, 
you will find generally that you are mistaken^ 
For presumption is so natural and common to 
man, and withal so subtle, that it secretly lurks 
under an imagined self-distrust, and the trust 
we fancy we place in God. 

To escape, then, as far as possible, from 
presumption, and to work in the spirit of self- 
distrust and trust in God, the consideration of 
your own weakness must go before the con- 
sideration of God's power, and both should 
precede all your actions. 



\ 



OF SELF-DISTRUST 1 5 



CHAPTER IV. 

I^oto loe map fenoto tol^ct!jer toe arc acting; initio %clf* 
Iii0tru0t ann Cruist fti (S^oti. 

ONE who is presumptuous oftentimes ima- 
gines that he has gained this spirit of 
self-distrust and trust in God, when he has really 
nothing of the kind. You may learn this by the 
way he takes his falls. 

If after a fall you give way to despondency 
and vexation, and despairingly complain that you 
can make no progress, such feelings evidently 
show that you have been trusting in yourself and 
not in God. 

And if your sadness and discouragement is 
much, then, there can be no doubt, that your 
trust in self was tnuch, and your trust in God but 
little. For he who much distrusts himself and 
trusts in God, when he falls, is not surprised at 
it, neither does he become sad, bitter, and 
desponding; because he knows his fall is owing 
to his own weakness, and the little trust he 
placed in God. 

On the other hand, as he grows in self-distrust, 
so more and more does he humbly trust in God ; 
and hating intensely his sin and the rebellious 
passions which caused his fall, and mourning 
over it with a deep, calm, and meek sorrow, 



t6 of timidity 



r 



because of the offence against God, he at once 
resumes his efforts, and pursues his enemies with 
new resolution and energy even to the death. 

I wish that some persons — who think them- 
selves spiritual — would well consider these 
things; who cannot, or will not, give themselves 
a moment's peace, when they have committed a 
fault Such persons rush off to their spiritual 
father chiefly to relieve themselves of their anxiety 
and vexation, which arise from self-love more 
than from any thing else, although their first 
concern should be to be cleansed from the stain 
of their sins, and to be fortified against temp- 
tation by the most holy Sacrament. 



CHAPTER V. 

2Df tTje mi0talfee of manp, tol&o T)olB ^^iminit^ for a 
Virtue. 

MANY persons fall into this error. These 
consider the fearfulness and restlessness 
which follow upon sin a virtuous feeling, (for it 
is accompanied by a certain dissatisfaction with 
one's self,) and do not see that it springs from 
a secret pride and from presumption, which are 
based on self-trust and self-reliance. Thinking 
themselves to be something, they have placed 



\ 



OF DISTR UST OF SELF I 7 

too much trust in their own strength. Their fall 
has obliged them to make the discovery that 
they do not possess this strength, and thus they 
are cast down and are full of wonder, as if 
something extraordinary had happened; and 
they become timid, because that trust in them- 
selves, upon which they had foolishly leant, had 
given way. 

The humble man knows no such experience, 
for his sole trust is in God. He places no reliance 
on his own powers. When he falls into any 
fault he is indeed sorry, but he is neither dis- | 
quieted nor surprised, for he knows, as the light 
of truth has clearly manifested to him, that the 
fall is the result of his own weakness and 
misery. 

CHAPTER VI. 

Jrurt|)cr autiice a^ to obtaining tT;i0 Distrugit of ^elC 
anD Cru0t in ^oO. 

INASMUCH as our whole strength for con- 
quering our enemies principally depends 
upon distrust of self and trust in God, I would 
furnish you with further counsels, that through 
the help of God you may attain this grace. 

Concerning distrust in self, it is above all 
important that you should know and be fully 
persuaded that not all gifts, whether natural or 



^\ — -: 



1 8 OF DISTR UST OF SELF 

acquired, nor all graces freely given, nor the 
knowledge of all Scripture, nor long and habitual 
exercise in God's service, are sufficient to enable 
you to do His Will; unless in every good work 
which has to be done, in every temptation which 
has to be conquered, in every danger which has 
to be avoided, and in every cross which has 
to be borne according to His Will, our heart 
is uplifted and sustained by His especial assist- 
ance, and His mighty Hand is outstretched to 
help us. 

Therefore we ought to bear this in mind 
throughout our whole life — every day, every 
hour, every moment; and never allow the 
thought that there are any grounds for confidence 
in ourselves. 

But with reference to trust in God, consider 
that it is as easy for God to overthrow many 
enemies as to overthrow few, and as easy for 
Him to conquer enemies old and experienced 
as to conquer the weak and unskilful. 

Therefore suppose a soul to be heavy laden 
with sins ; to have committed all possible sins, 
and to be full beyond description of all deformi- 
ties; let such a soul have made every effort, 
have resorted to every possible means and spiri- 
tual exercise in order to rise above sin and 
acquire virtues, and yet have failed in making 
the least progress ; nay, on the contrary, have 



T- 



OF SPIRITUAL EXERCISE 1 9 

been borne more than ever towards evil; yet 
that soul ought still to trust in God, and never 
to lay aside its spiritual weapons and exercises, 
but to continue strenuously to face the foe ; for 
no one loses in this battle but he who ceases to 
fight and to trust in God. 

He never ceases to help His soldiers, although 
He sometimes suffers them to be wounded. 
Only fight, for all depends on this. There are 
remedies at hand for healing the wounds of those 
warriors who look to God and to His help with 
confidence; and, when they least expect it, they 
shall find their enemies dead. 



CHAPTER VII. 

2Df Spiritual (Sjcercfgie^ ann fit^t of t^c <2£]ceccisie of 
tl^e (Hntier^tanTiingf, bjKjictj mu0t lie prejsetteti from 
3(iynorance ant Cutto^it^. 

DISTRUST of self and trust in God are 
very necessary in this conflict, yet are 
they not all that is required, for if we had only 
these weapons we should lose the victory and 
fall headlong into many evils. Therefore to 
these we should add a third weapon, which 
is spiritual exercise. Spiritual exercise relates 
principally to the understanding and to the will. 
With regard to the understanding, we must be 



OF SPIRITUAL EXERCISE 



on our guard against two faults, which very 
commonly impair its action. 

Ignorance is the first of these ; it darkens the 
understanding, and obstructs the entrance of truth 
— its proper object. Therefore you must by 
exercise of the understanding render it clear and 
bright, so that you may be able to see and dis- 
tinctly discern what you need for purifying your 
soul from its disorderly passions, and adorning it 
with holy virtues. 

Light may be obtained in two ways. 

The first and most important means is prayer. 
The Holy Ghost should be intreated to pour 
this light into our hearts, which He will not fail 
to do, if we are true with God, and really seek 
nothing else but the fulfilment of His holy Will, 
and entirely submit our own judgment to that 
of our spiritual fathers. 

The second way is, to gain the habit of viewing 
all things seriously and faithfully, in order to see 
them as they really are according to the teaching 
of the Holy Spirit, whether they are good or 
evil, and not according to their outward appear- 
ance, as judged by our senses, or by the world. 

And if things are duly considered from this 
point of view, we shall clearly see that all, which 
the world in its blindness and corruption, in so 
many and in such various ways, seeks after and 
is eager to gain, is empty and delusive ; and that 



=1^ 



\ 



OF HINDRANCES TO RIGHT DISCERNMENT 2 I 

the honours and pleasures of earth are but 
vanity and vexation of spirit; that injury and 
reproach, inflicted by the world, produce true 
glory, and that tribulation is a source of content- 
ment We shall learn, that to pardon our 
enemies and to benefit them is greatness of 
mind, and forms in us a close resemblance to 
God; that to despise the world is a nobler 
course than to have possession of it; that to 
obey for the love of God those far beneath us, 
is more generous and great than to rule great 
princes ; that a humble conception of ourselves 
is more precious than the highest intellectual 
attainments; and, that the victory over and 
mortification of a sUght rising of one of the 
passions is more glorious than the conquest of 
many cities, than the overthrow of powerful and 
armed forces, than the working of miracles and 
the raising of the dead. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

2)f tl&e !5intirancc!Sf to a riglbt Discernment of tH:Tjtna:iE{, 
ano of tl^e coursie ioT)tcl5 toe ^Tjoulti talte m oruer to 
IfuBge trulp concernino: tlbem. 

OUR failure in judging of the things above 
mentioned, and of others, must be traced 
to the precipitancy with which at the first blush 
we regard them either with love or hatred; and 



\\ 



7 



22 OF HINDRANCES TO RIGHT DISCERNMENT 

thus, the understanding is blinded and hindered 
from taking a dispassionate view of them. 
Therefore, that we may not be in this way 
deceived, we must keep our will as much as 
possible in suspense and free from all inordinate 
affections. 

When any object, then, is presented to you, 
view it with your understanding, and give it 
mature consideration before you conceive a 
hatred for it and reject it, if it is contrary to your 
natural inclinations ; or, before you are inspired 
with a love for it, if it is agreeable to your 
taste. 

For when the understanding, unclouded by 
passion, acts freely and clearly, it is able to detect 
the truth and to penetrate into the evil which is 
hidden under a fair appearance, and into the 
good which is veiled by a semblance of evil. 
Whereas, if the will is first inclined to love or 
hate any thing, the understanding afterwards 
cannot exercise a sound judgment upon it; 
because the affection, intervening between the 
object and the mind, prevents a just view of the 
object; and the understanding, giving back to 
the will this false representation, excites the will 
afresh to a love or hatred more vehement than 
before, in spite of every rule and law of reason. 

By this affection the understanding becomes 
more and more darkened; and this darkness 



V 



causes the object to seem more than ever desir- 
able, or hateful to the will. 

Therefore, unless the rule which has been laid 
down be observed (which is of the utmost 
importance), those two faculties — so noble and so 
excellent — the intellect and the will, will be made 
to act and re-act upon one another in a miserable 
circle, each in turn misleading the other, dark- 
ness producing thicker darkness, and error 
deeper error. 

Guard yourself with the greatest care against 
any irregular affection; whatsoever the object 
which is presented to you may be, first examine 
it and test it by the light of the understanding, 
that you may discover its true nature, and 
especially by the light of grace and prayer, and 
with the guidance of your spiritual father. 

And I would advise you to observe this most 
carefully in any outward works which are holy 
and of good report, for in such we are in greater 
danger of illusion and indiscretion, because they 
appear so good in themselves. 

Some circumstance of time, place, or degree, 
or some fault as to obedience, may ruin the 
whole, as has been the case with many who have 
incurred great peril through the performance of 
actions in themselves praiseworthy and most 
holy. 



24 OF EXERCISING A RIGHT JUDGMENT 



CHAPTER IX. 

S)f anotl^et tSTl^ina: from Inlaid) t\t antjcrsstannino: 
mu0t !ic prf^erbet m ortct to txtxt'x^t a Kigl^t 
3[tttgmettt. 

THE other danger against which the under- 
standing must be on its guard is curiosity; 
because, when we suffer it to be filled with hurt- 
ful, idle, and frivolous thoughts, we destroy its 
power of apprehending that which closely relates 
to the true mortification of ourselves and to our 
perfection. 

On this account, you must become as one dead 
to all earthly things which do not concern you, 
though they may be harmless in themselves. 

Ever restrain your understanding as much as 
possible, and love to keep it low. 

Let the news and the fashions of the world — 
whatever they may be, great or small — be to you 
as though they were not; and, should they come 
in your way, reject them and drive them from 
I you. Even in your desire to know heavenly 
things, preserve a sober and humble spirit, caring 
only to know Christ Crucified, His Life, and His 
Death, and whatever He requires of you. 

Keep other things far from you, and in this 
way you will become well-pleasing to God ; for 
He loves and counts as dear to Him those who 



■■f 



\ 



OF EXERCISING A RIGHT JUDGMENT 25 

desire and seek from Him only such things as 
are conducive to the love of His Divine Good- 
ness, and to the fulfilment of His Will. 

Every other petition and inquiry springs from 
self-love, pride, and the deceit of the devil. 

If you follow these counsels you will escape 
many snares; for when the wily serpent sees 
that the will of those who are aiming at a spiri- 
tual life is strong and resolute, he uses his 
endeavours to overthrow their understanding, 
that he may thus master both the one and the 
other. 

His plan is to instil into their minds — espe- 
cially if they have an acute and subtle intellect, 
and are likely to be puflfed up with pride — 
lofty and curious ideas; so that, being taken up 
with the pleasure of investigating such subjects, 
in which they falsely imagine that they are 
delighting in God, they may neglect to cleanse 
their hearts, and to acquire self-knowledge and 
true mortification. Thus, falling into the snare of 
pride, they make an idol of their own intellect. 

Hence, gradually and imperceptibly, they 
come to the conviction that they have no need 
of the guidance or instruction of others, accus- 
tomed as they have been, in all cases, to lean 
upon the idol of their own judgment. 

Such a condition is a perilous one, and not 
easily cured, for pride of the understanding is far 

1 =^ 



26 OF EXERCISING A RIGHT JUDGMENT 

worse than pride of the will; for the pride of the 
will, when manifest to the understanding, may in 
time be easily remedied by obedience to rightful 
authority; but how or by whom shall he be 
cured, who persists in regarding his own opinion 
as better than any other man's ? and how shall 
he submit to the judgment of others, when he 
regards it as inferior to his own ? 

The understanding is the eye of the soul, to 
which we must trust for discovering and healing 
the wound of the proud will; if then the eye be 
weak, or blind, or swelled with the same pride, 
who shall be able to work a cure ? and if the 
light become darkness, and that whereby we 
measure our actions be at fault, what will be- 
come of the rest ? 

Then resist without loss of time this malignant 
form of pride, before it penetrates into your 
inmost parts. Curb the quickness of your in- 
tellect ; readily yield to the opinion of others ; 
appear as a fool for the love of God, and you 
shall be wiser than Solomon. 



-i 1 



OF THE EXERCISE OF THE WILL 27 



CHAPTER X, 

©f ll&e €]cetci0e of \M miW, anli of t\t ^tiD to 
tul^tcl^ an out 2ction0, !)otl() tntoarD ant) outtoarn, 
0l(ioulti be ttrecteij. 

IN addition to this exercise which you must 
apply to the understanding, you must also 
discipline your will, so that it may not be left to 
follow its own desires, but be in all things con- 
formed to the good pleasure of God. 

And remember, that it is not enough that 
you should will and do those things which are 
most pleasing to God; but, beyond this, you 
must will and do them, as being moved by Him, 
and with the motive of simply pleasing Him. 

In this, even more than in the matter we have 
been considering in the previous chapter, lies the 
struggle with our nature, which seeks itself and 
its own pleasure in all things, and most of all in 
good and spiritual things; in these nature delights 
itself, revelling in them, as it suspects no harm 
from such food. 

As soon then as they are presented to us, we 
gaze longingly upon them, and crave for them ; 
not because we are moved to do the Will of 
God and wish only to please Him, but from a 
desire for that satisfaction and rest which we 



7 



V 



T 



28 OF THE EXERCISE OF THE WILL 

experience when we will those things which God 
wills. 

The more excellent the object is which we 
desire, the more liable we are to be deceived. 
Thus, even in the desire after God Himself, we 
are in danger of falling into the snares of self- 
love, by having an eye to our own interests and 
to the advantages which we expect from God, 
rather than to His Will, Whose pleasure it is 
that we should love, desire, and obey Him 
simply for the sake of His Glory. 

I will now tell you how to avoid this delusion, 
which would hinder your progress in holiness; 
and how to get into the habit of willing and 
doing all things according to the guidance of 
the Spirit of God, and with the pure motive of 
honouring and serving Him only. Who should 
be the Beginning and End of all our thoughts 
and actions. When any thing presents itself as 
in accordance with the Will of God, do not 
bring yourself to will it, until you have first lifted 
up your thoughts to God, to ascertain whether it 
is His Will that you should will it, and whether 
you will it because He does, and with the view 
of pleasing Him Alone. 

Then let your will — thus moved and drawn by 
His — be bent upon willing it, because He wills 
it, and with the sole object of pleasing and 
glorifying Him. 



I 



\ 



OF THE EXERCISE OF THE WILL 29 

The same course must be pursued in refusing 
the things which are contrary to God's Will. 
Do not refuse them till you have first fixed the 
eye of the understanding upon His Divine Will, 
Who wills that you should refuse them for the 
sake of pleasing Him. 

Know, however, that we little suspect how 
deceitful and crafty our nature is, which is ever 
secretly seeking self, for we are often led to ima- 
gine that our object and motive is to please 
God, when it is quite the reverse. 

Thus it comes to pass, that when we choose 
or refuse any thing for our own interest, we 
fancy that we are choosing or refusing it in the 
hope of pleasing, or fear of displeasing God. 

The true and inward remedy for this delusion 
is purity of heart, w^hich consists in this (which 
is really the aim of all this spiritual combat), 
namely — the putting off the old man, and the 
putting on the new. 

In order to be well prepared, seeing you are 
full of self, beware at the beginning of every 
action, lest there be any admixture of selfish 
motives, and free yourself as much as possible 
from them. Neither choose, nor do, nor refuse 
any thing, unless you feel yourself moved and 
drawn to that course by the pure and simple 
Will of God. 

If you cannot always feel that you are actuated 



7 



4 



30 OF THE EXERCISE OF THE WILL 

by this motive in your conduct, especially in the 
inward acts of the mind, or in short outward 
actions, you must rest satisfied that you virtually 
have it, from the habit of maintaining a pure 
intention of pleasing God Alone in all you do. 

But in actions which occupy some space of 
time, it is well not to be content with kindling 
this motive in your heart at the commencement 
of the action, but also to be careful to renew it 
frequently whilst the action is going on, and thus 
to preserve it alive to the very end. 

If you neglect to do this, you will be in danger 
of falling into a snare, which our natural self- 
love prepares — for it is always more inclined 
and ready to follow its own course than to yield 
to God — namely, that of changing unconsciously 
after a time the objects and aims which you had 
in view when you began the action. 

The servant of God, unless he is alive to this 
danger, often commences a work with the sole 
object of pleasing his Lord; but by degrees, and 
almost imperceptibly, he begins to take such 
pleasure in the work itself, that, losing sight of 
the Divine Will, he turns aside and becomes 
attached to the satisfaction he experiences in 
doing it, and to the advantage or credit he 
gains from it. 

Then, if God Himself place some hindrance 
in his way, and the work is impeded by sickness, 



OF THE EXERCISE OF THE WILL 3 1 

accident, or some one's interference, presently 
he is troubled and vexed, and begins to murmur 
at this or at that, not to say, sometimes even 
against God Himself, — too clear a proof that he 
was not wholly seeking the Will of God, and 
that the motive was rotten and corrupt at its 
core. 

For every soul which moves as God moves it, 
and aims at pleasing Him only, does not wish 
for this more than for that; nor to have any 
thing unless God wills to give it, nor to have it 
except in the way and for the time He appoints : 
such a soul is equally contented, whether having 
or not having it For in either case it obtains 
its purpose, and its wish is fulfilled, jvhich was 
nothing else but the good pleasure of God. 

Therefore keep yourself habitually recollected, 
and be diligent in directing all your actions to 
this perfect end. 

And if sometimes you are moved to do good, 
(according to the bent of your natural disposition) 
by fear of the pains of Hell or hope of the joys 
of Paradise, you may even through these motives 
look ultimately to the good pleasure and Will of 
God, Who delights not at your departure into 
Hell, but at your entrance into His Kingdom. 

The dignity and power of this motive no man 
can fully comprehend; a single action — even the 
least and most insignificant — done with the view 



¥ 



7 



32 OF THE EXERCISE OF THE WILL i 

of pleasing God Alone, and of glorifying Him, ! 
is worth infinitely more (so to speak) than many 
actions in themselves of the greatest value and 
worth, but springing from other motives. Thus, 
a single penny given to a poor man, with the 
sole object of pleasing His Divine Majesty, is | 
more acceptable in His Sight than the entire re- | 
nunciation of all our possessions, however great 
they may be, from some other motive, even for 
the attainment of the Bliss of Heaven, — an object 
not merely good, but one which is in the highest 
degree desirable. 

This practice of doing every thing with the 
simple intention of pleasing God Alone, appears 
difficult at first, but becomes easy and delightful 
by use, and by frequently fixing our desires on 
God Himself, and by longing after Him with 
the warm affections of our hearts, as our only 
and highest Good — the One Who deserves that 
all beings should seek Him for Himself, and 
should serve and love Him above all things. 

The more seriously and constantly we medi- 
tate upon the Infinite Excellence of God, the 
more fervent and frequent will these acts of the 
will become; and we shall easily acquire in this 
way the habit of performing every action out of 
love to that Lord, Who Alone is worthy of it 

Lastly, in order to gain this divine intention, 
I advise you to seek it from God by earnest 



\ 



OF SEEKING GOD's GOOD PLEASURE 



33 



prayer ; and to meditate often upon the number- 
less blessings, which God, out of pure love, and 
with no benefit to Himself, has bestowed, and 
is still bestowing upon us. 



CHAPTER XI. 

®f jsfome €ott0ilietation0 to!)fc|) map inDucc t^e WiiW 
to sieeli in all tl(jmg0 t^e (Soon pleasure of ®ou. 

MOREOVER, to render the will more in- 
clined to desire in all things the good 
pleasure and tlie glory of God, call oftentimes 
to mind, that in many ways He has first honoured 
and loved you. 

By Creation — making you out of nothing, after 
His likeness; and by making all other creatures 
for your use. 

By Redemption — sending, not an angel, but 
His Only-begotten Son, to redeem you, not with 
the corruptible price of silver and gold, but with 
His own Precious Blood, and His most painful 
and ignominious Death. 

Consider, too, that every hour, and every 
moment. He defends you from your enemies, 
fights for you by His grace, offers you continually 
in the Sacrament of the Altar His Dear Son to 
be your strength and nourishment; is not this 
a token of the inestimable love and regard which 



V 



T 



34 OF THE MANY WILLS 

the Infinite God has for you ? We cannot, on 
the one hand, conceive how much value so great 
a Lord sets on us poor creatures, in our base- 
ness and misery; and, on the other, how much 
we are indebted to His High Majesty, Who has 
done so many and so great things for us. 

For if earthly masters, when they are honoured 
even by men of poor and lowly condition, feel 
bound to honour them in return, how should 
our vileness behave itself towards the Sovereign 
Ruler of the Universe, by Whom we are so 
dearly prized and loved ! 

And, in addition to what has been already 
mentioned, keep ever a lively remembrance, that 
the Divine Majesty is infinitely worthy to be 
honoured and served simply for Himself, and 
for His own good pleasure. 

CHAPTER XII. 

©f t^e man? W^\\H toTjicl^ arc in C^an, anu of tide 
CCIarfarc Bettoccn tliem. 

ALTHOUGH in this spiritual combat man 
has two wills, — the will of the mind, which 
we call the reasonable and superior will; and 
the will of the senses, which we call the sensual 
and inferior will, and which sometimes bears the 
names of appetite, flesh, sense, and passion : yet, 
as it is through the reason we are men, we can- 



\ 



OF THE MANY WILLS 35 

not be said to will any thing when the lower will 
desires it, unless the higher will is disposed also 
to consent to it. 

And herein lies the whole spiritual struggle ; 
the reasonable will stands midway between the 
Divine Will which is above it, and the lower will 
of the flesh which is below it, and is continually 
assailed by the one or the other ; each seeking 
to attract it, to bring it into subjection, and to 
rule it. 

Great is the toil and struggle at the outset, 
which beginners experience when they resolve 
to amend their wicked lives, and — renouncing 
the world and the flesh — to yield themselves up 
to the love and service of Jesus Christ. For the 
battery, which the higher will sustains from the 
Divine and sensual wills warring on both sides 
of it, is so sharp and violent, that it entails 
much suffering. 

Those who are experienced in the ways of 
virtue or vice do not feel this, but pursue the 
course they have entered upon with less diffi- 
culty ; the virtuous yielding readily their will to 
the Divine Will, the vicious yielding without 
resistance to the will of the flesh. 

But let no one suppose it possible to form 
true Christian virtues, and to serve God as he 
ought, unless he is ready in good earnest to do 
violence to his own inclinations, and to endure 




36 OF THE MANY WILLS 

the pain of giving up all the things which pleased 
him, both great and small, and to which he had 
clung with earthly affection. 

For this reason few reach perfection ; for when 
they have overcome their greater faults with 
much toil, they will not continue to do violence 
to themselves, by bearing the vexation and weari- | 
ness which the resistance of the countless little 
wishes and little movements of the passions 
involves. Thus these insignificant enemies are 
permitted to have their own way, and so obtain 
complete mastery over their hearts. All those 
who, if they do not take what belongs to others, 
yet cling inordinately to that which is lawfully 
their own, are of this class. If they do not take 
unlawful measures for the sake of obtaining | 
honours, yet they do not, as they should, shun 
them; but, on the contrary, they covet them, 
and even sometimes by various ways seek to gain 
them. If they keep the fasts of obligation, they 
do not mortify their appetite as to superfluities, 
nor as to the delicacies which they crave for. 
If they live chaste lives, yet they do not abstain 
from some indulgences which hinder much their 
union with God and their growth in the spiritual 
life, and which even to the holiest persons are 
dangerous, and are especially so to those who 
fear them least, and therefore should be avoided 
by all to the utmost of their power. 



-f- 



\ 



7 



OF THE MANY WILLS 37 

The result of this course is, that all other good 
works are done in a lukewarm spirit, are mixed up 
with much self-seeking and secret imperfections, 
and are accompanied by a certain self-esteem, 
and by a desire for the praise and appreciation 
of the world. 

Such persons not only fail to advance in the 
way of salvation, but, by turning back, stand in 
danger of relapsing into their old sins ; because 
they have no love for true virtue, and show little 
gratitude to the Lord Who rescued them from 
the bondage of the Devil. Moreover, they are 
too blind and ignorant to see their real danger, 
whilst they delude themselves with the idea that 
they are in a safe condition. 

Here we discover a great error, and one so 
much the more injurious as it is the less guarded 
against Many who aspire to the spiritual life, 
being rather lovers of themselves than of that 
which is needful (although indeed they know it 
not), select for the most part those practices which 
accord with their own taste, and neglect others 
which touch to the quick their natural inclina- 
tions and sensual appetites, to overcome which 
all reason demands that they should put forth 
their full strength. 

Therefore, beloved, I advise and entreat you 
to cherish a love for that which is painful and 
difficult, for such things will bring you victory 



38 OF ACQUIRING HABITS OF VIRTUE 

over self; — on this all depends. That victory 
will be the more certain and speedy, the more 
resolutely you give your heart to those toils 
which in holiness and in war are the lot of be- 
ginners ; and if you love the toil and hardship 
of the struggle, rather than the victory and the 
virtue, you shall the sooner gain all things. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

SDf ttie toap to tuxix tT)c ^en^ual ampuljiejs, ann of 
t^z act0 to !ie performeo Ip t\z tJKin, in orficr 
to acquire !&abit0 of C3irtue. 

WHENEVER the reasonable will is at- 
tracted by the will of the flesh on one 
side, and by the Divine Will on the other, each 
contending for the mastery, it will be necessary 
to exercise yourself in many ways, in order 
that the Divine Will may in all things prevail 
within you. 

First, whenever you are assaulted and buffeted 
by the impulses of the lower nature, you must 
resist them manfully, so that the higher will may 
not consent. 

Secondly, when the assaults have ceased, 
excite them again, so as to have an opportunity 
of overcoming them with greater force and 
energy. Then challenge them again a third 



T 



I 
—I 

T 



OF ACQUIRING HABITS OF VIRTUE 39 

time, so as to accustom yourself to repulse them 
with scorn and horror. These two challenges 
to battle should be made in the case of every 
unruly appetite, with the exception of tempta- 
tions of the flesh, of which we will treat in their 
place. 

Lastly, you should make acts contrary to each 
evil passion you have to resist You will under- 
stand this the better by the following example — 

Suppose, then, you are attacked by feelings of 
impatience. Look well into yourself, and you 
will discover that the higher will is continually 
aimed at by these temptations, in order to incline 
it to consent to them. 

At once resort to the first thing which has 
been recommended; use the higher will re- 
peatedly in opposing these feelings, resist them 
with all your might, that you may not be drawn 
to consent to them. 

Do not leave off the conflict till the enemy is, 
as it were, wearied out, dead, and yields himself 
vanquished. 

But, beloved, see the malice of the Devil. 
When he perceives that we resolutely resist the 
rising of any passion, he not only refrains from 
stirring it, but when it is excited he seeks to 
quiet it for the time, lest, by the practice of 
resisting it, we should form the habit of the 
opposite virtue. 



\ 



7 



40 OF ACQUIRING HABITS OF VIRTUE 

And besides this, he would dexterously lead 
us to believe, that we have as brave soldiers 
quickly trampled under foot our enemies at one 
blow, so that he may entrap us with the snares 
of pride and vain-glory. 

Therefore, pass on from a first to a second 
encounter, by recalling to memory and exciting 
anew within you those thoughts which led to 
the temptation of impatience, until you are 
conscious of the feeling again ; then resist with 
a stronger will than before, and with greater 
force repress the feelings. 

And because, unless we thoroughly hate 
them, we are still in danger of being overcome 
by fresh attacks from our enemies — however 
successful we may have been in resisting them 
from a sense of duty and a desire to please God 
— you must face them a third time, and drive 
them far from you, not only with dislike but with 
disdain, picturing them to yourself as worthy of 
hatred and abhorrence. 

Lastly, in order that the soul may be adorned 
and perfected with habits of virtue, you must 
often make inward acts which shall be directly 
opposed to your unruly passions. 

Thus, if you want to gain perfect patience, 
when you have received an affront which tempts 
to impatience, it will not be enough to exercise 
yourself in the three ways of fighting which I have 



\ 



OF ACQUIRING HABITS OF VIRTUE 4 1 

already described, you must learn further to desire 
and love the slight you have received, wishing for 
a repetition of it, and from the same person ; 
awaiting and disposing yourself to suffer still 
greater insults. These contrary acts are neces- 
sary for our perfection in holiness, because the 
above-named exercises of resistance — many and 
efficacious as they are — are not sufficient to 
pluck out the roots of sin. 

And therefore {to continue the same instance) 
although, on recewmg an insult we may not 
consent to the feelings of impatience, but fight 
against tliem in the three ways which have been 
recommended yet, unless we accustom our- 
selves by many and constant acts of the will 
to love contempt and rejoice in it, we shall never 
be free from the vice of impatience, springing as 
it does from a regard for our own reputation 
and a dread of contempt. 

And if the root of this sin be left alive, it will 
be sure to spring up afresh again and again, until 
virtue is weakened, and wholly choked by it ; it 
will keep us in continual danger of a relapse 
upon every occasion. Therefore, without these 
contrary acts, the true habit of virtues can never 
be acquired. 

And keep in mind also, that these acts must 
be so frequently made, as to be sufficient to de- 
stroy the sinful habit ; for this habit, having been 



-\ 



T 



42 OF ACQUIRING HABITS OF VIRTUE 

formed by repeated acts of sin, can only be 
removed by repeated acts of the opposite virtue, 
and thus a counter-habit of holiness be attained. 

Moreover, a greater number of good acts are 
required to form a habit of virtue than of evil 
acts to form a vicious habit; in that the former 
are not in alliance with our nature, which is 
corrupt, but the latter are always aided by it. 

Again, I would add to all that has been said, 
that, if the virtue you are striving to acquire 
need it, you must perform the outward acts in 
conformity with the inward; as, for example, 
speaking gently and lovingly, and, if possible, 
rendering services, to those who have in any 
way vexed and thwarted you. 

And although these acts — both inward and out- 
ward — are done, or seem to be done, with such 
weakness of spirit as to make them appear to be 
a most unwilling service, yet you must on no 
account fail to do them; because, however weak 
they ftiay be, they will keep you strong and secure 
in the battle, and make easy before you the path 
to victory. 

Stand on your guard, and be self-controlled, 
so as to be ready to resist every assault of the 
passions, not only such as are hot and violent, 
but also the slightest and the gentlest movement ; 
for these latter open the way for the former, and 
thus habits of sin are afterwards generated in us. 



\ 



OF ACQUIRING HABITS OF VIRTUE 43 

It comes to pass, from the little care men take 
to root out of their hearts lesser desires, that, 
after having conquered the stronger cravings of 
the same passion, many, when they least expect 
it, have been assaulted and vanquished by their 
old enemies more completely and fatally than 
at first. 

Be mindful, too, sometimes to mortify and 
check yourself in things which are lawful but not 
necessary ; for, from such a course of discipline, 
many good results will follow. 

You will in this way dispose yourself more and 
more for victory over self in other things, you 
will gain strength and skill to struggle against 
temptations, you will avoid manifold devices of 
the Devil, and perform a work very pleasing to 
the Lord. 

Beloved, I speak plainly to you ; if, in the way 
which I have taught you, you will go on faithfully 
and constantly in these holy exercises for reform- 
ing and mastering yourself, then, I promise you, 
that you shall in a short time make much 
progress, and become really spiritual, and not in 
name only. 

But in no other way, or course of discipline — 
however such may commend itself to you and 
be agreeable to your taste, yea, though it may 
seem to unite you in secret converse with your 
Lord — can I assure you that you will attain any 



7 




7 



44 OF ACQUIRING HABITS OF VIRTUE 

real virtue or holiness. For this does not con- 
sist in (as I told you in the first chapter) — neither 
does it spring from — exercises which are pleasant 
to us and which accord with our natural tastes, but 
it is the fruit of the crucifying of the flesh with all 
its actions, and the renewing of man by the 
practice of the virtues of the Gospel, and the 
uniting him to his Crucified Creator. 

Depend upon it, that as habits of sin are 
produced by many and repeated acts of the 
higher will, yielding itself to the sensual ap- 
petite; so, on the other hand, habits of the 
virtues of the Gospel are acquired by the per- 
formance of frequent and repeated acts of con- 
formity to the Divine Will, as it calls us to the 
practice of different virtues from time to time. 

For as our will can never become vicious or 
earthly, however fiercely assaulted or allured by 
the lower nature, unless it inclines towards or 
consents to the temptations; so, on the other 
hand, our will, however forcibly drawn and 
assailed by inspirations and Divine grace, will 
never become virtuous or be united to God, so 
long as by inward, and it may be, outward acts, 
it does not suffer itself to be brought into con- 
formity with His Will. 



\ 



OF THE HIGHER AND LOWER WILLS 



45 



¥ 



CHAPTER XIV. 



CKtiat oug:l&t t^ i)e none totjen t!je l[)iffl&er CKiH 0eem0 
to be to|)on^ obercome ann jsitiflen lip tl&e lotoer 
CaiHj atiD !)p it0 €nemie0. 

IF sometimes the higher will should seem to 
you powerless against the lower, and its other 
enemies, because you do not feel that your will 
is effectually set against them, yet stand firm 
and do not leave off fighting; for you must re- 
gard yourself as victorious, until you can clearly 
see that you have given way. 

For since the higher will can act without the 
lower, so the higher can never be compelled by 
the lower to yield, however hot the assaults of 
the latter may be. 

God has, in truth, given to the will such 
liberty and such power, that, if all the senses, 
all evil spirits, and all the world were to conspire 
together, and with their combined strength to 
assault and oppress it, the will could still in spite 
of them will or will not whatever it liked with 
perfect freedom, and could assert itself when 
it liked, and as often as, for as long as, in what 
manner, and for whatever end, best pleased it. 

And if these enemies should ever attack you 
and press you with such violence as almost to 
stifle your will, so as to leave you, as it were. 



V 



7 



46 OF THE HIGHER AND LOWER WILLS 

no breath to make an act of the will against 
them; yet do not lose courage, nor throw down 
your arms, but in such a case make use of your 
tongue and defend yourself by saying — "I do 
not yield to you, 1 do not consent to you;" 
after the manner of one who has been grasped 
and thrown to the ground by an enemy leaping 
upon him, and, when he is unable to thrust at 
him with the point of his sword, contrives to 
strike him with the hilt. 

And as he strives to spring backwards so as 
to wound his enemy with the point of the sword, 
so do you retire into the consideration of your- 
self, the knowledge that you are nothing, and 
that you can do nothing. Then, putting your 
trust in God Who can do all things, strike a 
blow at the passion which attacks you, and say 
— "Help me, O Lord; helpme, my God; help 
me, Jesus, Mary's Son, that I may not yield to 
this." 

You may also, if the enemy gives you time 
for it, call in your understanding to aid your 
will, and by the use of various considerations 
impart to the will fresh power and spirit against 
the enemy. Thus, for example, when you are 
in some persecution or trouble, and are so at- 
tacked by temptations to impatience that the 
will cannot, or at least will not, stand up against 
them, you will proceed to encourage it by 



\ 



OF THE HIGHER AND LOWER WILLS 47 

considering some points, such as the follow- 
ing:— 

First, consider, that if you have brought upon 
yourself the evil under which you are suffering, 
you deserve to bear it; for, in such a case, every 
rule of justice requires you to bear patiently the 
punishment which you have yourself been the 
means of inflicting. 

Secondly, if you are not to blame in this par- 
ticular matter, think that there are many faults 
which you have committed, for which you have 
received no chastisement from God, nor have you 
punished yourself for them as you ought. And 
seeing that the Divine mercy has changed the 
punishment of these faults, which should have 
been eternal, or at least should last for ages in 
another world, into this light affliction, ought you 
not to receive it willingly, or even thankfully ? 

Thirdly, if the thought should come that the 
penance is a long one in comparison with the 
offence against the Divine Majesty — a thought 
which no one can ever lawfully indulge — you 
must remember, that it is only through the strait 
gate of much tribulation that any can enter into 
the Kingdom of Heaven. 

Fourthly, think that were it possible to enter by 
an easier way, the law of love would not allow 
you to dream of doing so, seeing that the Son 
of God; with all His friends and His members. 




reached that Kingdom by the road of thorns and 
crosses. 

Fifthly, the chief thought upon which your 
mind should dwell in this, and in all other 
temptations, is the Will of your God, Who, for the 
love He has for you, takes unspeakable delight in 
every act of holiness and mortification which 
you, as His faithful and devoted soldier, perform 
in return for His love to you. And be thoroughly 
convinced of this, that the more unreasonable in 
itself the trouble is, and the more shameful on 
account of the person from whom it comes and 
therefore to you the more vexatious and difficult 
to be borne, so much the more pleasing will you 
be to the Lord, if, in things disordered in them- 
selves and especially grievous to you, you can 
approve and love His Divine Will and Provi- 
dence, by which every event — ^however irregular 
it may seem to be — is disposed after a most per- 
fect rule and order. 

CHAPTER XV. 

^ome ^ug:ffe0tion0 aBout tf^e manner of H^ic^Wtt^y 
anil ejsipccialTp against totjat ^ncmie0, anB ^iti) 
iij^at Qirtue0, iue^sil&oulti content!. 

YOU have seen already, how you must fight 
if you would conquer self, and adorn 
yourself with virtues. 



T 



■^ 



OF THE MANNER OF FIGHTING 49 

Know, also, that to gain a quicker and easier 
conquest over your enemies, it is expedient, nay, 
necessary, that the conflict should be carried on 
daily, and especially the conflict with self-love ; 
learn to receive, therefore, as dear friends, all 
the slights and insults which the world can heap 
upon you. 

From our want of attention to this strife, and 
from making it of too Httle account, it frequently 
happens, as I have said before, that our victories 
are few and imperfect, are hardly won, and are 
not lasting. 

Further, I warn you that you must fight 
with great steadfastness of purpose. And this 
gift you will easily gain, if you seek it by 
prayer ; and if, when on the one hand you take 
into account the endless hatred and rage of 
your enemies, and the vast number of their 
squadrons and armies : you, on the other hand, 
consider how infinitely greater is the Goodness 
of God, and the love with which He loves you, 
and how much mightier too are the Angels of 
Heaven, and the prayers of the Saints, who are 
fighting on our side. 

Animated by these reflections, how many, 
many poor weak women have resisted and over- 
come all the power and wisdom of the world, all 
the assaults of the flesh, and all the fury of Hell ! 
Therefore, you need never be disheartened. 




50 OF THE MANNER OF FIGHTING 

though at times the assaults of your enemy seem 
perpetually renewed, and though they threaten 
to last all your Hfetime, and though certain falls 
on every side menace you ; for, remember, — 
besides what has been already said — that the 
whole strength and wisdom of our enemies is in 
the Hands of our Divine Captain, for Whose 
honour we contend. 

He values us inexpressibly; and having Him- 
self called us and commanded us to engage in 
the battle, not only will He never suffer you, 
as far as He is concerned, to be overcome, but 
He Himself will fight for you, and give your 
enemies into your hand, in His own good 
time ; and this to your greater reward, though 
He keep you waiting even to the last day of 
your life. 

All you have to do is to fight valiantly, and 
never to throw down your arms, nor flee, how- 
ever many wounds you may have sustained. 

Finally, to spur yourself on to fight coura- 
geously, you must bear in mind that from this 
conflict there is no escape; for not to fight is all 
one with being taken prisoner or slain. Besides, 
the fury and bitter hatred of our enemies are 
such, that there is no possibility of any truce or 
peace. 



T 



OF THE SOLDIER OF CHRIST 5 1 



CHAPTER XVI. 

3fn tol&at toap t%t ^olBict of C^rigt js^oulo tafee ttje 
JielB earlp m tl^c (©ornino:. 

AS soon as you wake, the first thing to be 
observed by the eyes of your mind, is your 
position in the field of battle, where you are 
hemmed in by enemies, and under the absolute 
necessity of fighting, or perishing for ever. 

Within this view represent to yourself, your 
enemy — the evil inclination which you have 
sworn to renounce, facing you on the one side, 
and armed so as to be able to wound and kill 
you ; and, on the right hand, see your victorious 
Leader, Jesus Christ, with His most holy Mother, 
the Virgin Mary, and her beloved husband, 
Joseph, and countless hosts of Angels and 
Saints, especially St. Michael the Archangel ; 
on the left hand, behold the Devil from beneath, 
with his followers, ready to kindle the passion 
in question, and to entice you to yield to it 

Then you shall seem to hear a voice, as of your 
guardian Angel, saying unto you, "You have to- 
day to fight against this enemy and against others 
too. Let not your heart sink, and do not lose 
courage; nor yield from fear or on any other 
account, for our Lord, your Captain, stands 



7 




f 



52 OF THE SOLDIER OF CHRIST 

beside you, with all His glorious hosts with 
Him; and He will fight for you against all 
your enemies, and will not permit them to 
prevail against you either by force or oppres- 
sion. 

Only stand firm, and do violence to yourself, 
and do not shrink from the pain which such a 
discipline will cost you. Cry unceasingly from 
the depths of your heart, and call upon the Lord, 
asking also for the help of the Blessed Virgin and 
all the Saints, and then you will be certain to gain 
the victory. If you are weak and inexperienced 
in the strife, and your enemies appear to be 
many and powerful, yet much more is the 
strength which He, Who made and redeemed 
you, will give you than that which they possess ; 
and beyond all measure and comparison is your 
God mightier than they, and His Will for your 
salvation stronger than the will of your enemies 
for your destruction. 

Fight therefore, and do not spare yourself 
the pain; for from the toil in overcoming and 
doing violence to your evil inclinations, and 
from the suffering which the war against sinful 
habits necessitates, you shall gain the victory, 
and win the exceeding great reward, and 
therewith purchase for yourself the Kingdom of 
Heaven, and the everlasting union of your soul 
with God." 



\ 



OF THE SOLDIER OF CHRIST 53 

Begin the conflict in the Name of the Lord, 
taking up the armour of distrust of self and trust 
in God, with prayer and spiritual exercises; 
with these arms challenge this foe, that is, this in- 
clination, whatever it may be, which, according 
to the order above laid down, you have resolved 
to overcome. Do this, now by open resistance, 
now by deep loathing, or again, by acts of the 
opposite virtue; wounding it with oft-repeated 
and deadly blows, in order to please your Lord, 
Who, with His whole Church Triumphant, is 
looking on and watching the combat 

I tell you again, that you must not grow 
weary in the conflict, but must ever bear in 
mind that it is the bounden duty of all to serve 
and please God; that the necessity of fighting is 
absolute, and escape impossible without wounds 
or death. I tell you, also, that if, as a deserter 
you were to fly from God, and give yourself to 
the delights of the world and of the flesh, you 
would still, in spite of yourself, be forced to 
labour in the sweat of your brow against many 
and many a contradiction which would pierce 
your heart with deadly anguish. 

Consider, then, what madness it would be to 
incur all this toil and pain — which only lead 
to greater toil and pain with endless death — 
simply to avoid that which will soon be over, 
and which would bring us to a life eternal and 



7 



\ 



54 OF THE CONFLICT WITH OUR PASSIONS 



T 



infinitely blessed in the everlasting enjoyment 
of our God. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

©f tTjc ©ruer tc'bt oi)0crticti m tfje QLonflift toitlt) out 

IT is of the utmost importance that we should 
know what order to observe in this combat, 
lest— as is the case with too many, to their great 
loss — ^we fight in a casual or formal manner. 
The best order for proceeding in this battle 
against your enemies and your evil inclinations 
is as follows : — 

Having diligently examined your heart, and 
searched into the difrerent thoughts and affec- 
tions which encompass it, and having discovered 
by what passion it is most of all possessed 
and governed; then against this first, direct your 
attack. If it happens that, meanwhile, you are 
assailed by other enemies, you must turn against 
the one which at the moment threatens you and 
most closely attacks you, and then return at 
once to the thief point of conflict. 



OF SUDDEN RISINGS OF THE PASSIONS 55 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

SDf tl&e toa? to overcame batmen Kigingiaf of tl(je 
Pa00ion0. 

IF you have not gained the habit of warding 
off sudden attacks, whether of injuries or 
adverse occurrences ; in order to acquire it, your 
plan will be to anticipate such attacks, and de- 
sire to bear them over and over again, and thus 
dispose yourself for actually receiving them. 

The way to forestall them is this, — having 
considered the bent of your passions, consider 
also the places where, and the persons with whom, 
you are likely to be thrown; you may easily 
thus conjecture what may probably happen. 

And should any other vexatious circumstance 
arise, which you had not foreseen, in addition 
to the general help which a prepared mind 
gives, even to meet evils beyond those for 
which it was prepared, you may with advan- 
tage avail yourself of the following mode of 
meeting it : — 

As soon as you first feel the blow of this 
unexpected injury or trial, be on your guard at 
once, and make the effort to lift up your mind 
to God, contemplating His unspeakable good- 
ness and love to you, in sending you this trial in 



7 



56 OF SUDDEN RISINGS OF THE PASSIONS 

order that you, bearing it out of love for Him, 
may be the more purified, and may be brought 
near and united to Him. 

And, realising how greatly it pleases Him 
that you should suffer this, turn to yourself and 
say, "Ah, why so reluctant to bear this cross, 
which is laid upon you not by this or that person, 
but by your Father in Heaven?" Then turn to 
the cross, embrace it with the fullest resignation 
and joy, and say, "O cross, formed by Divine 
Providence before I was bom ! O cross, sweet- 
ened for me by the sweet love of my Crucified 
One — nail me now to thee, that 1 may give 
myself to Him Who, dying upon thee, hath 
redeemed me!" 

And if, at the onset, the passion so prevail 
over you, that you cannot lift up your heart to 
God, but remain wounded, strive even then to 
do as at the beginning, and to fight as if you 
had not received a wound. 

The most effectual remedy, however, against 
these sudden impulses, is to cut out without 
delay the cause from which they spring. 

Thus, if you find out that your affection for 
any thing is so great, that, whenever it is pre- 
sented to you, you fall into a sudden agitation 
of mind, the best precaution for the future lies 
in the habitual effort to uproot the affection. 

But if the agitation is caused not by a thing, 



7 



OF RESISTING THE LUSTS OF THE FLESH 57 

but by a person, for whom you have such an 
aversion that every little action annoys and 
irritates you, the remedy then is, to force your- 
self to incline your will to love him and to 
regard him, not only because he is a creature 
like yourself, formed by the Almighty Hand, 
and formed anew by the same Divine Blood, but 
also, because he affords you an opportunity, if 
you will accept it, of becoming Hke unto your 
Lord, Who was loving and kind unto all. 



CHAPTER XIX. 
!J)olr to re0i0t tl(jc JLu^tg of tlje jFIcjilb. 

THIS temptation must be dealt with in a 
way peculiar to itself, and unlike any 
other. In order, therefore, to fight successfully 
against it, three periods of time must be ob- 
served : — 

1. Before the temptation. 

2. During the temptation. 

3. After the temptation. 

I. Before the temptation, the struggle must be 
against the things which lead to it. 

First, you must not war against this vice by 
confronting it, but, on the contrary, by fleeing 
with all your might from the thing or person 
that may have the least likelihood of exciting it. 



V 



7 



58 OF RESISTING THE LUSTS OF THE FLESH 

And if through necessity you have to converse 
with such a person, be as brief as you can, and 
preserve a grave and modest demeanour, and let 
your words incline to harshness, rather than to 
excess of tenderness and affability. 

Presume not on your own strength, if you are 
free, and have been for very many years free, 
from the temptations of the flesh ; for this cursed 
vice does in an hour what for years it has failed 
to do, often making its advances stealthily; and 
the more it comes in the garb of a friend without 
exciting suspicion, the more grievous are the in- 
juries and the more fatal the wounds it inflicts. 

And often there is more to be feared — as 
experience has often shown, and shows every 
day — where intercourse seems perfectly legi- 
timate, as with relations, or in the discharge of 
duties, or with persons who from their virtues 
ought to be beloved. For with this too frequent 
andunguarded intercourse, the poisonous pleasure 
of sense insinuates itself; gradually instilling 
itself, until it penetrates into the very depths of 
the soul, and darkens the reason more and 
more, until things which are most dangerous are 
regarded as of no account ; such as loving looks, 
words of mutual endearment, and charms of con- 
versation ; and thus, step by step, a ruinous fall 
is approached, or at the least some painful temp- 
tation which is with great difficulty overcome. 



\ 



OF RESISTING THE LUSTS OF THE FLESH 59 

Once more I say to you — fly ! for you are as 
tow. Trust not to being moistened, as it were, 
with the water of a good and strong purposej^ and 
a resolution rather to die than to offend God ; 
for by frequent excitement, the heat of the fire 
will gradually dry up the water of your good 
purpose, and, when you least expect it, will so 
attack you, that no respect will be left for 
friends or kindred, no fear of God, no regard 
for life or reputation, nor for all the pains of 
Hell. Therefore fly ! fly ! if indeed you would 
avoid being overtaken, made prisoner, and 
slain. 

Secondly, avoid idleness, and be watchful and 
active, engaged with the thoughts and deeds 
suitable to your state of life. 

Thirdly, never rebel against the will of supe- 
riors, but obey readily, doing promptly all that 
they bid you; and the more willingly obey those 
who humble you, and who are most opposed to 
your natural will and temperament. 

Fourthly, beware of rashly judging your neigh- 
bour, and especially in regard to this sin ; and 
if his fall be evident, show him pity rather 
than indignation, and do not despise him ; try 
rather to gather from his fall the fruits of lowli- 
ness and self-knowledge, acknowledging yourself 
to be dust and nothing ; draw near to God in 
prayer, and avoid more carefully than ever any 



7 



\- 



T 



60 OF RESISTING THE LUSTS OF THE FLESH 

intercourse, which may bring with it even the 
shadow of danger. 

For if you are ready to judge and despise 
another, God will correct you to your cost, and 
will permit you to fall into the same fault, that 
you may be convinced of your pride ; that, by 
such a humiliation, you may at the same time 
find the remedy for both these sins. 

And, even if you do not fall into this sin, 
remember, that, unless you put away this sin of 
rash judgment, your state will still be one to be 
much concerned about. 

Fifthly and lastly, take heed, lest, when you 
are favoured with some spiritual sweetness and 
delight, you fall into the snare of a certain vain 
complacency, and imagine yourself to be some- 
thing, and that your enemies are no longer able 
to attack you, because you entertain towards 
them such a feeling of disgust, hatred, and 
loathing. If you are put off your guard in this 
manner, you will easily fall. 

2. During the time of temptation, find out 
whether it arises from inward or outward causes. 

By outward, I mean such things as curiosity 
of the eyes and ears, indulgence in fine dress, 
habits, and conversations which stir up this 
vice. 

The remedies in such cases are modesty and 
decency, guard of the eyes and ears from what 



\ 



7 



OF RESISTING THE LUSTS OF THE FLESH 6 1 

may stir up this evil, and (as I have said ahready) 
flight. 

The inward causes are, either vigour of body, 
or imaginations of the mind which proceed either 
from our evil habits, or from the suggestions of 
the Devil. 

The vigour of body must be brought down by 
fasting, chastisement, mortification, watchings, 
and similar hard measures; but these must be un- 
dertaken with discretion and under obedience. 

Unholy thoughts, from whatever source they 
arise, must be remedied as follows : — 

First, by constant occupation in the different 
duties which are consistent with our state of life ; 
secondly, by prayer, and by meditation. 

Let prayer be made in the following way : — 

When you are first slightly conscious, I do 
not say of the evil thoughts themselves, but of 
those which lead up to them, at once fly in 
spirit to your Crucified Lord, and say, " My 
Jesus ! my dear Jesus ! make haste to help me, 
lest I fall into the enemy's hands!" At other 
times, clasping the Cross on which your Lord 
hangs, and kissing again and again the Wounds 
of His Sacred Feet, say lovingly, — " O beautiful 
Wounds, chaste Wounds, holy Wounds, wound 
now my heart, miserable and impure as it is, 
and free it from all that is offensive in Thy 
Sight." 



^ 



t 



T 



62 OF RESISTING THE LUSTS OF THE FLESH 

At the time of the temptation to carnal in- 
dulgences I do not recommend you to meditate 
upon certain points — as many books suggest — as 
a remedy against this temptation; such, for in- 
stance, as the vileness of this vice, its insatiable- 
ness, the loathing and remorse which follow upon 
it, the peril and loss of goods, life, honour, and 
all such things. For this is so far from being a 
sovereign remedy against such temptations, that 
it may prove hurtful rather than otherwise ; for 
if, on the one hand, the mind dispels these 
thoughts, on the other, it affords the opportunity 
and exposes us to the danger of taking pleasure in 
them, and consenting to the delight. Therefore 
the sure remedy is flight in all these cases, both 
from the thoughts themselves, and from every- 
thing — however contrary to them — which may 
bring them to the mind again. 

Take, therefore, for your subject of meditation 
the Life and Passion of our Crucified Redeemer 
for this purpose. And if, during your medita- 
tion, the images of the same thoughts come be- 
fore the mind's eye against your will, and molest 
you more than ever — as is frequently the case 
— do not therefore despond, nor leave off your 
meditation, neither turn your attention to these 
thoughts with a view to resisting them, but 
pursue it with all possible intenseness, taking no 
notice of these thoughts, which in no sense 



\ 



OF RESISTING THE LUSTS OF THE FLESH 63 

belong to you. There is no better plan of 
resisting them than this, however frequently 
these assaults may come. 

You may finish your meditation with this, or 
some similar request, — "Deliver me, O my 
Creator and Redeemer, from my enemies, to 
the honour of Thy Passion and of Thy un- 
speakable Goodness ;" and then give no further 
thought to the sin, for the bare remembrance 
of it is not without danger. 

Never, at any time, slay to dispute with such 
temptations, whether you have consented or 
not; for this is a device of the Devil, who seeks, 
under the guise of a good motive, to harass you 
and render you distrustful and despondent ; or 
hopes, by keeping your attention on such ques- 
tions, to plunge you into some wrong pleasure. 

Therefore, in this temptation (when you are 
not clear as to whether you have consented or 
not) it will be sufficient to confess the whole as 
briefly as possible to your spiritual father, and 
then to rest satisfied with his opinion upon the 
matter, without thinking about it more. Be 
careful, however, that you lay bare before him 
every thought, and do not let human respect or 
shame hinder you from doing so. 

For if in all cases we need the virtue of 
humility in order to overcome our enemies, we 
must exercise it in this more than in any other; 



/ 




64 



OF OVERCOMING SLOTH 



this vice being, as a rule, the punishment of 
pride. 

3. When the temptation has gone, you must 
act in this way: — However free, and however 
secure you fancy yourself to be from all danger, 
yet keep your mind far away from those subjects 
which may have occasioned the temptation^ even 
should you feel an inducement to do othenvise 
for the sake of some good and virtuous end. 
For this is a device of our corrupt nature, and 
a snare of our subtle enemy, who transforms 
himself into an angel of light, that he may draw 
us into the darkness. 



CHAPTER XX. 

SDf tlje CKap to oijcrcomc ^lot!). 

THAT you may not fall into the miserable 
bondage of sloth, which not only hinders 
all spiritual progress, but also delivers you into 
the bands of your enemies, you must avoid all 
curiosity and earthly attachment, and every occu- 
pation which does not belong to your state of life. 
You must then exert yourself to obey every 
good inspiration from above, and every com- 
mand of those who are over you; doing every 
thing at the time and in the manner which they 
approve of. 



7 



V 



OF OVERCOMING SLOTH 65 

Never delay, even for an instant; for that 
first indulgence will bring another in its train, 
and then a third, and then others after it; and 
finally the senses will yield more easily than at 
the beginning, being already allured and capti- 
vated by the pleasure which they have tasted. 
The consequence of this is, that, when it is too 
late we begin to act, or neglect altogether a 
duty which is then too irksome. 

Thus gradually the habit of sloth is formed, 
which in time so grows upon us, and brings us 
into such a state, that at the very instant, when 
we are bound hand and foot with the chains of 
sloth, we vainly purpose to be more diligent and 
more active at another time, being obliged with 
blushes to own to ourselves our present exces- 
sive indolence. 

This sloth runs through every thing we do, 
and not only infects the will, by making it hate 
work, but also blinds the understanding, so that 
it cannot detect how vain and unfounded are 
its purposes of doing diligently and promptly, at 
some future day, that which should be done at 
once, but which is either voluntarily left undone, 
or deferred to some other time. 

And it is not enough to do at once what you 
have to do : we must, in order to do it as 
perfectly as possible, do it at the very time 
which the nature and quality of the work de- 



/ 



\ 



T 



66 OF OVERCOMING SLOTH 

mand, and with all the diligence which be- 
fits it. 

For that is not diligence, but a very subtle 
form of sloth, which leads us to do our work 
before its time, and to despatch it hastily, not 
caring whether it be done well or not, so that 
we may then quietly give ourselves up to the 
enjoyment of a sluggish rest, upon which our 
thoughts were bent, when we were hurrying 
through our task. 

This great evil proceeds from the want of 
duly considering the value of a good work, 
when done at the right time, and with a de- 
termination to overcome the toil and difficulty 
which the sin of sloth puts in the way of newly- 
enlisted soldiers. 

You must often, therefore, call to mind, that 
one ejaculation to God, one single bending of the 
knee to His honour, is worth more than all the 
treasures of the world; and that, whenever we 
do violence to ourselves and to our bad inclina- 
tions, the Angels bring to our souls a crown 
of glorious victory from the Heavenly Kingdom. 
And consider also, on the other hand, that 
from the slothful, God by little and little with- 
draws the graces which He had bestowed upon 
them; whilst to the diligent He gives more 
abundant graces, and permits them at last to 
enter into His joy. 



\ 



OF OVERCOMING SLOTH 67 

As to the toil and hardship, if you feel at first 
unable boldly to face it, hide them from you, 
that they may not seem so formidable as sloth 
would represent them. 

The work you have before you, perhaps, is to 
gain some virtue by many repeated acts of it, 
and with many days' toil; and the enemies you 
have to encounter seem numerous and powerful. 
Begin, then, these acts, as if you had but few to 
make, and but a short time to endure the con- 
flict. Fight against one enemy at a time, as if 
there were no more to be resisted; and fight 
with full confidence that, with the help of God, 
you will be stronger than all who are against you. 
By this means sloth will gradually lose ground, 
and give place by degrees to the entrance of 
the opposite virtue. 

The same plan holds good in prayer. If one 
hour is allotted for prayer, and to sloth the length 
of the time appears difficult, enter upon it with 
the intention of spending ten minutes ; then, 
when that time has passed, take ten minutes 
more ; and so you will pass easily through the 
remainder, until the whole hour is spent. But 
if, after ten or twenty minutes, you feel a violent 
distaste and difficulty in going on, leave off for 
a time, lest you become weary; but return again 
after a little while to the exercise you had quitted. 

You should adopt the same course in regard 



V 



7 



68 OF OVERCOMING SLOTH 

to manual labour, when it is your duty to under- 
take works which seem to sloth interminable 
and tedious, and which, therefore, you cannot 
view without vexation of mind ; begin, neverthe- 
less, courageously and calmly with one, as if it 
were the only one you had to do ; and when, 
having confined your attention to that, you have 
finished it, then go on with the next; and in 
this way, you will get through the whole of them 
with far less exertion than your slothfulness 
could have conceived to be possible. 

But if you do not follow this plan, and face 
with courage the toil and hardship which lie in 
your way, the vice of sloth will so gain the 
mastery over you, that you will be always 
harassed and vexed, not only by the present toil 
and struggle, which ever accompany the first 
practice of virtue, but also by the sight of that 
which is afar off. You will live in dread of being 
tried and assailed by enemies, or of seeing some 
one impose a fresh burden on your shoulders ; 
so that, even in times of peace, you will be full 
of apprehension. 

Further, remember, beloved, that this vice of 
sloth, with its secret poison, will not only gradu- 
ally kill the early and tender roots which would 
ultimately have produced habits of virtue, but 
also habits of virtue which are already formed. 
It will, like the worm in the wood, insensibly 



\ 



OF OVERCOMING SLOTH 69 

eat away and destroy the very marrow of the 
spiritual hfe. It is by this means the Devil 
spreads his nets and traps in the way of all of 
us, but especially of those who seek to become 
spiritual. 

Watch, therefore, with prayer, and labour with 
diligence, and delay not to weave the web of 
your wedding-garment, for you should be found 
clothed in it when the Bridegroom comes. 

Remember every day, that He Who gives 
you the moraing does not promise the evening, 
and when He gives you the evening, does not 
promise the next morning. 

Spend, then, every moment of the passing 
hour in a way which is pleasing to God, as if it 
were your last, and so much the more carefully, 
seeing that for every moment you must give the 
strictest account. 

Finally, I advise you to consider that day as 
lost, in which (though you may have transacted 
much business in it) you have neither gained a 
victory over some sinful inclination, or form of 
self-will, nor thanked the Lord for all His bene- 
fits, and above all for His Sorrowful Passion 
endured for you, and for His Fatherly and 
sweet chastisements, when He has made you 
worthy to receive from Him the inestimable 
treasure of some trial. 



7 



T 



70 OF THE GUARD OF THE OUTWARD SENSES 



CHAPTER XXI. 

®f t!)e ©uarD of tljc SDutisjarn ^ens(c0, aitti Ijoto from 
t!)ej3e ioe map pa00 to tl^e Contempfation of t]()t I 
DiiJinitp, 

GREAT care and constant practice are ne- 
cessary for the right control and guard 
of our outward senses. For the appetite, which 
may be regarded as the captain of our corrupt 
nature, is madly bent upon seeking pleasures 
and satisfaction; and, being incapable of itself of 
obtaining them, it makes use of the senses as its 
soldiers, and as natural instruments for laying 
hold of their objects, the images of which it 
takes, appropriates, and impresses on the mind. 
From this a sensation of pleasure arises, which, 
by means of the close connexion between the 
soul and the flesh, spreads itself through all 
the sensual part of our nature, and thus soul 
and body are possessed by a common contagion, 
which corrupts the whole. 

You see the evil ; now mark the remedy. 

Be careful not to let your senses wander as 
they like ; nor to employ them merely for the 
sake of pleasure, without any good end, or with- 
out having in view either usefulness or necessity. 
And if, through want of watchfulness, they have 
already wandered too far, recall them at once, 



\ 



OF THE GUARD OF THE OUTWARD SENSES J I 

or restrain them, so that instead of remaining in 
a state of miserable bondage to vain pleasures, 
they may gather a noble spoil from each object, 
and bring it home to the soul; and that the 
soul, by an act of recollection, may spread her 
wings with renewed energy towards Heaven, and 
rise to the contemplation of God. This may be 
thus done : — 

When an object is presented to any one of 
your outward senses, separate in thought the 
spirit and the material substance, and reflect 
that of itself it possesses none of those qualities 
which your senses attribute to it, but that all is 
the work of God, Who by His Invisible Spirit 
endows it with the being, beauty, goodness, or 
charm whatever it be which belongs to it Then 
rejoice that your Lord Alone is the Cause and 
Principle of such great and varied perfections, 
and that in Himself they are all contained in 
the highest degree ; for they are but the faintest 
shadows of His Infinite Excellence. 

Whenever you discover yourself to be absorbed 
in the act of admiring some noble object, let 
your thoughts bring the creature down to its 
own nothingness, and let your mind's eye gaze 
upon the great Creator therein present. Who 
made it to be what it is; and, delighting in 
Him only, say — " O Divine Essence, above all 
things to be desired, what joy it is to think that 



7 



"J 2 OF THE GUARD OF THE OUTWARD SENSES 

Thou Alone art the Infinite Principle of every 

i created being." 

i In the same way, when you behold the trees, 

the plants, and things of that kind, you will per- 
ceive that their life does not flow from them- 
selves, but from the Invisible Spirit, Which 
Alone gives them life. Then you can say — 
"Behold here the true Life, from Whom, in 
Whom, and through Whom all things live and 
grow ! O living satisfaction of this heart of 
mine !" 

So, when you see any of the brute creation, 
you will lift up your thoughts to God, Who 
gives them sensation and pov/ers of movement, 
saying — " O Thou First Mover, Who, moving 
all things, art Thyself unmoved by any, how do 
I exult in Thy stability and firmness !*' 

And when you rejoice in the beauty of some 
creature, separate that which you see from the 
Spirit Which you do not see, and consider, that 
all which appears outwardly fair, springs only 
from the Invisible Spirit, from Whom this out- 
ward beauty has its source, and say with all 
delight — "Behold these rivulets from the un- 
created Fountain ! behold these are little drops 
from the boundless Ocean of all good ! Oh, 
how do I rejoice from my inmost heart at the 
thought of that Eternal, Infinite Beauty, Which 
is the Origin and Cause of all created beauty." 



\ 



OF THE GUARD OF THE OUTWARD SENSES 73 

And when you behold in others, goodness, 
wisdom, justice, or other virtues, make the same 
separation in your mind, and say to your God, 
"O most rich Treasury of ail virtues, how 
greatly do I rejoice, that from Thee Alone, and 
through Thee, flows every good ; and that all in 
comparison of Thy perfection is as nothing ! I 
thank Thee, Lord, for this and for all other 
good gifts, which Thou hast bestowed upon my 
neighbour; remember. Lord, my poverty and 
sore need of this very virtue ! " 

When you exert yourself to do any thing, bear 
in mind that God is the first Cause of this action, 
and that you are nothing but His living instru- 
ment; and, lifting up your thoughts to Him, say 
thus — " How great, O Sovereign Lord of all, is 
my inward joy, that without Thee I can do 
nothing, and that Thou art the first and chief 
Worker in all things." 

If you eat or drink, think that it is God Who 
makes your food pleasant to you; and, rejoic- 
ing in Him Alone, you will be able to say — " Be 
glad, O my soul, that as there is no true satis- 
faction but in God, so in Him Alone in every 
thing you can delight" 

When your senses are gratified by some sweet 
odour, do not rest in the enjoyment itself, but 
let your thoughts pass on to your Lord, from 
Whom the delight comes; and, filled with inward 



-\\- --^ 



74 



OF REGULATING OUR SENSES 



joy at this contemplation, say — " Grant, O Lord, 
that as I rejoice because all sweetness comes 
from Thee, so may my soul, cleansed and de- 
livered from all earthly gratifications, mount up 
to Thee, and be acceptable as a sweet savour 
poured forth in Thy Presence." 

When you are delighted with the harmonies 
of music and singing, turn your heart to God, 
and say — " How do I rejoice, O my Lord and 
God, in Thy Infinite Perfections, which not 
only form a more than heavenly harmony within 
Thyself, but also unite in one marvellous concert 
the Angels in Heaven and all creatures." 



CHAPTER XXII. 

J^olD tlbc j3ame tSn^higricf map offer U0 opportunities of 
regulating our Senses bp pa^jsiing on to ^enita* 
tion on tlbe ^Incarnate CCIorti in x\z SPp0tcrie0 of 
t)\^ iLife anTJ J0a00ton. 



-J 



I HAVE already shown you the way to raise 
your minds from sensible objects to the 
contemplation of God. Now learn how to use 
sensible objects as reminders of the Incarnate 
Word, by reflecting on the most Holy Mysteries 
of His Life and Passion. 

All things in the universe may serve to this 
end, if, as I said before, you first behold God in 



\ 



OF REGULA TING OUR SENSES 7 5 

them as the Sole First Cause, Who has given 
them all their being, beauty, and excellence. 
Passing on from thence, consider how great and 
boundless is His Goodness, Who, being the Sole 
Source and Lord of all creation, was pleased to 
descend so low as to become man, to suffer and 
die for man, thus permitting the very works of 
His Hands to arm themselves against Him and 
crucify Him. 

Many objects, then, will bring particularly 
these Holy Mysteries before your mind's eye; 
such as weapons, cords, scourges, pillars, thorns, 
reeds, nails, hammers, and other instruments of 
His Passion. 

The sight of a hovel may recall to our memory 
the stable and manger of our Lord. Rain may 
remind us of that rain of Divine Blood which 
watered the ground, falling from His Sacred 
Body in the Garden. Rocks will represent to 
us those which were split asunder at His Death ; 
the earth will bring to remembrance the earth- 
quake which then took place; the sun, the dark- 
ness which obscured it, and the sight of water 
will speak to us of that stream which flowed 
forth from His most Sacred Side. Other things 
may be used in a similar manner. 

Whenever you taste wine, or other drink, 
think of the vinegar and gall which was given 
to your Lord. 



7 




76 OF REGULATING OUR SENSES 

If you enjoy a sweet perfume, think of the 
stench from the dead bodies which He smelt 
on Calvary. 

Whilst dressing, have in mind how the Eter- 
nal Word clothed Himself with human flesh, 
that He might clothe you with His Divinity. 
When undressing, remember how the Saviour 
was stripped of all His garments, in order to be 
scourged and nailed to the Cross for you. 

If you hear the shouts and cries of a multi- 
tude, recall the hateful voices which shouted 
into His Divine ears, "Crucify Him ! Crucify 
Him ! Away with Him ! Away with Him !" 

When the clock strikes, remember the painful 
beating of the heart which Jesus endured in the 
Garden, as the fear of His approaching Death 
and Passion oppressed Him; or, imagine you 
are listening to the heavy blows by which they 
nailed Him to the Cross. 

Whatever grief or pain you suffer yourself, or 
see others suffering, reflect that it is all nothing, 
when compared with the inconceivable anguish 
which pierced and wrung the Body and Soul of 
your Lord. 



7 



\ 



OF GOVERNING OUR SENSES 77 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

2Df ott)er luap^ of ^oljcrning our ^en0e0 accoruing to 
tide tiiffcrent occa0ion0 "m^it^ l()appen. 

HAVING shown you how to raise your 
mind from outward things to the con- 
templation of the Divinity, and to the Mysteries 
of the Incarnate Word, I will here add some 
other helps for meditations in a different manner, 
that, as the tastes of our souls are various, so also 
may be the food which is supplied. Moreover, 
this may be useful not only to simple-minded 
persons, but also to those who are more talented 
and more advanced in the spiritual life, and who 
nevertheless are not always equally disposed or 
ready for more profound contemplations. 

Nor need you fear that the suggestion of such 
a variety of methods will be perplexing, if you 
will only keep to the rule of discretion, and to 
the advice of others, which I would have you, 
not only in this instance but on all occasions, 
follow with lowliness and trustfulness. 

When you look upon so many things of earth, 
which are pleasant to the eyes and valued, consider 
that they are utterly vile and as dung in respect 
of the Heavenly riches ; after which, despising 
the whole world, aspire with your whole heart. 



7 




T 



78 OF GOVERNING OUR SENSES 

When you look towards the sun, consider how 
much brighter and more beautiful your soul is 
than it, if you are in the favour of the Creator ; 
and if not in a state of grace, think that it is 
blacker and more abominable than the darkness 
of Hell. 

When you raise your eyes to the heavens 
above you, let the eyes of your mind pierce 
through it to the Heaven of heavens, and there 
fix yourself in thought as in the place prepared 
for your eternal and most blessed resting-place, 
if you live innocently on earth. 

If you hear the songs of birds, or other sweet 
strains, lift up your mind to the songs of Para- 
dise, where sounds the endless Alleluia; and 
pray the Lord to make you meet to praise Him 
for ever, in union with those heavenly spirits. 

If the beauty of a creature fascinates you, 
remember that the serpent of Hell lies hidden 
beneath it, anxious and ready to kill or at least 
wound you, and say to him — "Ah, accursed 
serpent, with what subtlety dost thou lay wait to 
devour me !" . Then turn to God and say — 
" Blessed be Thou, my God, Who hast discovered 
to me the secret enemy, and rescued me from 
his ravenous jaws ! " After this, fly at once 
from the allurement to the Wounds of your 
Crucified Lord, and let your mind be occupied 
with them, musing upon the great things your 



\ 



OF GOVERNING OUR SENSES 79 

Lord suffered in His most Sacred Flesh in order 
to redeem you from your sins, and to render all 
carnal delights odious to you. 

I would also remind you of another way of 
escape from this dangerous enticement, namely, 
to represent to yourself vividly how this object 
which so charms you, would appear in your eyes 
after death had worked its change. 

When walking, think how each step brings 
you one nearer to death. 

Let the birds in the air, and the water in the 
stream, remind you that your life even with 
greater swiftness is hurrying on to its close. 

Let violent storms of wind, peals of thunder, 
and flashes of lightning bring you to the thought 
of the awful Day of Judgment ; and on your 
bended knees worship God, and pray for grace 
and time to make due preparation for your 
appearing before His Supreme Majesty. 

In the different accidents which may happen 
to you, you may act in the following manner : — 

When (for instance) you feel very melancholy 
and depressed in spirits, or are tried by heat or 
cold or any other bodily pain, lift up your heart 
to the Kternal Will, which has for your good and 
happiness appointed you this discomfort, and 
has arranged the time and duration of it. Then, 
rejoicing in this manifestation of the love of God, 
and for the opportunity of serving Him in the 



V 



7 



8o OF GOVERNING OUR SENSES 

way which seems to Him best, say in your heart 
— •' Behold in me the fulfilment of the Divine 
Will, which has from all eternity lovingly or- 
dered that I should now undergo this trial. 
Blessed, ever-blessed, be my most gracious 
Lord ! " 

When any good thought arises in your heart, 
turn at once to God, and acknowledge that it 
comes from Him, and give thanks to Him 
for it. 

When you read, seem to see beneath the 
words your Lord, and receive them as if at 
that moment they were proceeding out of His 
Divine Lips. 

When you look on the Holy Cross, remember 
that it is the standard of your warfare ; and, that 
if you forsake it, you will give yourself over into 
the hands of cruel enemies, but if you follow it, 
• you will enter into Heaven, laden with glorious 
spoils. 

When you see the sweet image of the Blessed 
Virgin, let your thoughts turn to her who reigns 
in Paradise, and be thankful that she was every 
moment ready to do the Will of God; that she 
bore, nourished, and tended the Redeemer 
of the world ; and, that in our spiritual conflict, 
she is ever desirous to give us her sympathy and 
aid. 

Let the images of Saints represent to you so 



\ 



OF GOVERNING OUR SENSES 



8l 



many champions who, having bravely run their 
course, have opened the way by which, if you 
too run, you shall be crowned with them in end- 
less glory. 

When you see a church, you may, amongst 
other devout reflections, consider that your soul 
is the temple of God, and that you are therefore 
bound to strive to keep it pure and spotless, as 
His dwelling-place. 

When you hear the three sounds for the 
Angelical Salutation, make the following short 
meditations on the words which are said before 
each of the little heavenly prayers. At the first 
stroke of the bell, give thanks to God for that 
message which came from Heaven to earth and 
was the beginning of our salvation. At the 
second, rejoice with the Blessed Virgin at the 
greatness to which she was raised through her 
most profound and matchless humility. At the 
third stroke, unite yourself with the most Blessed 
Mother and the Angel Gabriel in adoring the 
Divine Child newly conceived; and remember 
to bow your head with reverence at each stroke, 
and with a lower reverence at the last 

These meditations at the three strokes of the 
bell will serve for all seasons. The following 
for morning, noon, and night are more fitted 
for the season of the Passion ; for we are 
especially bound to remember the sorrows 



V 



82 OP GOVERNING OUR SENSES 

endured by our Lady at that time, and should 
be open to the charge of ingratitude were we 
to neglect to do so. 

In the evening, then, think of the -anguish 
of that most pure Virgin, on account of the 
Bloody Sweat, the seizing in the Garden, and all 
the untold sorrows which through that night her 
Blessed Son endured. 

In the morning, condole with her for what she 
suflfered when her Son was brought before Pilate 
and Herod, was condemned to die, and when 
He came forth bearing His Cross. 

At noon, pass on to the thought of the sword 
of grief which pierced the heart of this afflicted 
Mother at the Lord's Crucifixion and Death, and 
at that most cruel piercing of His most sacred 
Side. 

These meditations on the grief of the Blessed 
Virgin will serve you from Thursday evening 
till Saturday at noon, the former will suit the 
other days of the week. I leave all this, how- 
ever, to be settled by your own devotional 
attraction, and by the opportunities which exter- 
nal objects afford. 

But to conclude in few words, I will only 
add — as a general rule for governing the senses 
— be watchful that, in all the occurrences of 
your life, whatever they may be, you are not 
moved or drawn, either by love or hatred of them, 



-f 



\ 



OF RULING THE TONGUE 83 

but only by the Will of God, embracing what 
God wills you to embrace, and hating what God 
wills you to hate. 

And observe, that these diflferent rules for 
governing the senses are not given to you that you 
should be always thinking about them ; for your 
mind should be fixed on your Lord continually, 
Who wills that, by frequently making acts of 
the contrary virtues, and by resistance, you 
should conquer your enemies and subdue your 
evil passions. I have simply given you these 
directions to help you when you stand in need 
of them. 

For you must know that there is little fruit in 
the multiplicity of spiritual practices, however 
excellent they may be in themselves. They 
often end in perplexity, self-love, instability, and 
the snares of the Devil. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

IJoiD to Eutc t!)c tongue. 

THE tongue of man needs to be well ruled 
and restrained, because we are all too in- 
clined to let it run on and discourse upon things 
which are most agreeable to our senses. 

It is usually pride which is at the root of 
much speaking. We persuade ourselves that 

j — \ 



84 OF RULING THE TONGUE 

we know a great deal, and take delight in our 
own conceits; and then, we strive by a multitude 
of words to convey to others the same idea, so 
as to gain an ascendancy over them, as though 
they stood in need of our instruction. To 
express in a few words all the evils which arise 
from much speaking is an impossibility. 

Talkativeness is the mother of idleness, the 
evidence of ignorance and folly, the door of 
slander, the purveyor of falsehood, the damper 
of fervent devotion. 

A multitude of words kindles the evil pas- 
sions, and these in turn incite the tongue to 
continue its thoughtless utterances. 

Indulge not in lengthy conversations with 
those who are bored thereby, lest you weary them, 
nor with those who like to listen to you, lest 
you go beyond the bounds of modesty. 

Do not speak loudly, or in a dictatorial 
manner, which is odious to others and a mark 
of presumption and vanity. 

Never speak of yourself, or of your doings, or 
of your family, unless there is real necessity for 
doing so, and then be as brief, as reserved as 
possible. If others seem to you to talk too 
much about themselves, try to view their con- 
duct in a favourable light ; but do not copy it, 
even though their words may tend to self- 
humiliation and self-condemnation. 



T 



\ 



OF RULING THE TONGUE 85 

Rarely speak of your neighbour and of his 
affairs, unless, indeed, an opportunity offers of 
saying something in his favour. 

Be ready to speak of God, and especially of 
His Love and Goodness, but with guardedness, 
lest you fall into some error concerning Him ; 
and rather delight to hear others speak of Him, 
treasuring up their words in your inmost heart. 

Let the sound of mCn's words strike only 
upon your ear, and let your heart be lifted up to 
God ; and, if you must listen to what they say 
in order to know how to reply to ihem, still 
forget not to raise your eyes thoughtfully towards 
Heaven, where God dwells, and contemplate 
His loftiness, as He deigns to regard your 
vileness. 

Whatever comes into your mind for you to 
speak, ponder over it well before you utter it, for 
you will discover that much which you were going 
to say had better remain unspoken. Indeed I go 
further, and assure you, that not a few of those 
things, which you have after consideration spoken, 
would have been better if they had been con- 
signed to silence ; and the truth of this you will 
perceive, if, when the occasion for speaking is 
past, you reflect upon what you have said. 

Silence, beloved, is a safe stronghold in the 
spiritual battle, and a sure pledge of victory. 

Silence is the friend of him who distrusts self 



t 



/ 



T 

86 OF LA YING ASIDE ALL ANXIETY OF MIND 

and trusts in God ; it is the guardian of the 
spirit of prayer, and a wonderful help in the 
attainment of virtues. 

If you would learn to bridle your tongue, 
think often upon the evils and dangers of talk- 
ativeness, and the great advantages of silence. 
Love this virtue; and from time to time (in 
order to gain the habit of it) keep silence even 
when you might lawflilly speak, provided no 
prejudice arise from it to your neighbour or to 
yourself. 

And to keep aloof from conversation will be 
the more helpful, because instead of men, you 
will have for your companions the Angels, the 
Saints, and God Himself. 

. Finally, give yourself to the thought of the 
conflict in which you are engaged, that, seeing 
how much lies before you, you may the more 
easily refrain from overmuch talking. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

Cl^at tTie ^oToier of Ctinet, if Tie tooulti !)£ ^\xtu^^* 
ful against Tjisf €nemic!S, mudt, as far ai^ po00iMe, 
Jap acittie atl agitation ano anrict^ of C^inn. 

SINCE when we have lost peace of mind 
we should do our best to regain it, so 
should we learn that there is absolutely no- 



\ 



OF LA YING ASIDE ALL ANXIETY OF MIND 87 

thing which ought to rob us of it, or even dis- 
turb it. 

We have just cause to grieve over our sins, 
but this sorrow should be calm, as we have 
already shown in more than one place. And so 
our sorrow for the sins of all others should be a 
tranquil sorrow, — pitying them with a holy feeling 
of charity, and lamenting, at least inwardly, over 
their oflfences. 

As to other sad and distressing events, as 
illness, bodily injuries, death of nearest relatives, 
pestilences, wars, fires, or such like misfortunes, 
which are painful to nature and shunned by the 
men of the world, we are fully able by Divine 
Grace not only to accept, but also to embrace 
them, as just punishments to the wicked and 
opportunities of virtue to the good. 

It is in this light our Lord God Himself views 
them with approbation ; and if we would only 
follow His Will, then we should pass through 
all the troubles and vexations of this life with 
a calm and peaceful spirit. 

And know, as a certainty, that all anxiety of 
mind is displeasing in His Divine Sight, what- 
ever may be the cause of it, for it is never free 
from imperfection, and always springs from 
some evil root of self-love. 

Keep therefore a sentinel always on the 
watch, who shall give the alarm as soon as he 



7 



^ 




88 OF LA YING ASIDE ALL ANXIETY OF MIND 

discovers any cause of trouble or agitation, that 
you may take up arms in self-defence. 

And remember, that all these evils, and others 
like them, are not really evils, though outwardly 
they may seem so, neither can they deprive us 
of any real good, but are ordered or permitted 
by God for the just ends which I have men- 
tioned, or for other purposes which are not re- 
vealed to us, but which are doubtless most just 
and holy. 

Thus may the most unfortunate occurrence 
become productive of much good to us, if we 
will only keep our mind calm and restful ; other- 
wise all our efforts will be of little or no use. 

For when the heart is thus agitated, it is always 
exposed to various assaults of the Enemy ; and 
in such a state we cannot discern the right path 
and the sure road to holiness. Our Enemy, who 
hates this peace above all things, knowing it to 
be a mark of the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, 
Who works in it great wonders, often, under the 
guise of a friend, tries to deprive us of it, by 
stirring up sundry desires within us which pre- 
sent themselves under the appearance of good ; 
but their deceptive nature may be discovered 
by this test amongst others, that they rob us of 
peace of mind. 

. In order, therefore, to avert so great an evil, 
when the sentinel gives notice of any fresh de- 



\: 



OP LA YING ASIDE ALL ANXIETY OF MIND 89 

sire, do not admit it into your heart, until you 
have first, free from all self-seeking and self-will, 
laid it before God ; and, confessing your own 
ignorance and blindness about it, have earnestly 
besought Him to show you, whether the desire 
comes from Him, or from your adversary. And, 
if possible, obtain also the judgment of your 
spiritual father in this matter. 

Moreover, even if the desire does come from 
God, yet be careful, before you follow it, 
to restrain all impetuosity, because the work 
which is entered upon in a mortified spirit, will 
be far more acceptable to Him, than that which 
is undertaken with natural eagerness. And 
often the mortification is more pleasing in His 
sight than the work itself. 

Thus, rejecting all desires not good, and not 
acting upon the good ones until you have first 
curbed your natural impulses, you will be ena- 
bled to possess the fortress of your heart in 
peace and safety- 

If you would keep it in perfect peace, you 
must take care also to guard and defend it from 
certain stings of conscience and feehngs of 
remorse, which are sometimes from the Devil, 
although, as they accuse us of some moral 
failure, they seem to come from God. By their 
fruits you shall know theu: source. If they 
humble you, if they make you diligent in good 



/ 



V 



90 OF LAYING ASIDE ALL ANXIETY OF MIND 

works, if tliey do not rob you of your trust in 
Gk)d, then may you thankfully receive them as 
from God. But if they occasion anxiety, and 
render you fearful, doubtful, slothful, and back- 
ward in well-doing, be assured that they come 
from the Enemy ; do not listen to them, but go 
on with what you are doing. 

Moreover, disquietude arises still more com- 
monly from the approach of adverse events. In 
order to defend ourselves against this form of 
attack, there are two things for us to do : — one 
is to consider and find out what is chiefly 
hindered by these events, our spiritual life, or 
our self-love and self-will. For if they wound 
our self-will and self-love (our first and greatest 
foe) they must not be called adverse, but be 
regarded as special favours and aids from the 
Most High God, and therefore be received with 
a joyful and a thankful heart. 

And if they are adverse to the spiritual life, 
you must not even then suffer your peace of 
mind to be destroyed, as I will show in the 
following chapter. 

The second thing is to lift up your heart to God, 
and, with your eyes closed, to accept all things from 
the compassionate Hand of His Divine Provi- 
dence, as from a Hand fiill of manifold blessings, 
of which, though as yet you do not understand 
them, you are content to know nothing further. 



- _ 1 

7 



OF WOUNDS 91 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

CCttiat toe mu0t tio lulbcn toe are CCTounUeli. 

WHEN you feel yourself wounded, from 
having through your weakness, or even 
through wilfulness it may be, fallen into some 
sin, do not be discouraged nor be over-anxious, 
but turn at once to God, and say unto Him : — 
"Behold, O I^rd, what of myself I have done; 
what else could be expected of me but 
falls?" 

Then, pausing a little, humble yourself in 
your own eyes, bewail the offence which you 
have committed against your Lord, and without 
discouragement rouse your indignation against 
your vicious passions, and especially against 
that one which caused your fall. 

Then say: — " And not even here. Lord, should 
I have stopped, if Thou of Thy goodness hadst 
not held me back !" 

After this, render Him greater thanks and love 
than ever, wondering at the greatness of His 
clemency in extending to you His right Hand 
to save you from another fall, when you had 
just offended Him. 

Lastly, say, with full confidence in His Infinite 
Mercy: — "Forgive me, O Lord, according to 



7 



92 OF WOUNDS 




Thy Mercy ; let me never depart from Thee nor 
be separated from Thee, and suffer me never to 
offend Thee any more." 

When this has been done, do not sit down 
to consider whether God has pardoned you or 
not ; for this is Only pride, anxiety, restlessness, 
waste of time, and, under colour of various pre- 
texts, a snare of the Devil. But commit your- 
self freely into the merciful Hands of God, and 
pursue your course, as if you had not fallen. 

And if you should fall many times and receive 
many wounds in one day, do what I have told 
you, with the same confidence, the second, third, 
or even last time, as at the first; despising 
yourself, and detesting your sin, strive to live 
more watchfully. 

This way of taking falls is ver}' displeasing to 
the Devil, both because he sees it to be very 
pleasing to God, and because he is thereby 
baffled and conquered by the one whom at first 
he succeeded in conquering. And, therefore, 
he adopts many artful devices for the purpose of 
leading us to relinquish it, and is often successful 
through our carelessness and too little watchful- 
ness over ourselves. The more difficult you 
find this exercise, the more severely must you 
deal with yourself, renewing it again and again, 
even after a single fall. 

If, after a fall, you feel anxious, disturbed, and 



\ 



OF WOUNDS 93 



fearful, the first thing to aim at is the recovery 
of peace and tranquillity of mind, and with it, 
your trustfulness. Furnished with these arms, 
turn again to the Lord ; for your distress about 
your sin was occasioned, not by the considera- 
tion of the offence against God, but of the loss 
to yourself. 

To recover this peace, you must for the time 
wholly forget your fall, and fix your mind on 
the unspeakable Goodness of God ; considering 
His great readiness and eagerness to pardon 
every sin, however grievous ; and how He calls 
the sinner by various means and many ways to 
return to Him, that He may unite him to Him- 
self in this life, and by grace sanctify him, and in 
the life to come by His Glory may make him 
blessed for ever. 

When you have quieted your mind with these 
and similar reflections, think once more upon 
your fault, doing as I have already bidden you. 

Again, at the times of sacramental confession 
(and I recommend you often to resort to this) 
look again at your falls, and with renewed sorrow 
and displeasure for having offended God, and 
with a resolve never to offend Him more, open 
them with all simplicity before your spiritual 
father. 



7 




94 OF ASS A ULTS ON A HOLY LIFE 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

SDf t|)e SDrUer ioTjic!) tl^e l!)et)il ob^etiieisi in \\^ 

a^uauftd anu ^tratagjemjEi agram^t tljoue tul^o 

ffitjc t1jem0elte0 to a !bofp Life, atiB tl&o0e tutio 
ate alreanp foutin in tl^c 'Bonuagc of %in. 

YOU must know, beloved, that the Devil 
seeks nothing but our ruin, and that he 
does not use the same plan of assault with all. 

In order to describe to you some of his 
modes of attack, His devices and wiles, I will 
set before you several conditions of men. 

Some are yet in the bondage of sin, and with- 
out a thought of leaving it. 

Others desire to be free, but never make an 
attempt to get so. 

Others, again, imagine that they are walking 
in the way of holiness, while they are wandering 
away far from it. 

Others, lastly, after having attained a high 
degree of virtue, fall into greater ruin. 

We will ^eak of each separately. 



f 



OF THE BONDAGE OF SIN 95 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

SDf t^c a^jaiaulr^ ann Deljkeji \x^\\t\ t^e Debit cm» 
pTo^B acfain^t tl;o0c toT)o arc !)cTti in tl^c "Bontiage 
of ^In. 

WHEN the Devil holds any one in the bon- 
dage of sin, his great concern is to turn 
away his mind from every thought which might 
lead him to discover his most unhappy condition. 

And not only does he divert the mind from 
all thoughts and godly inspirations which may 
call him to repentance, by instilling thoughts 
foreign to the subject; but by occasions, ready 
and prepared for him, he makes him fall into 
his old sins, or even into worse ones. 

Thus, his blindness waxing thicker and denser, 
he more deeply plunges into a headlong and 
reckless course of sin, and passing from one 
stage of darkness to another, and from sin to 
fouler sin, his wretched life like a wheel runs on 
even to death, unless God of His grace should 
provide some means of stopping him. 

The remedy for one in this unhappy state, on 
his side, is to be ready to listen to every whisper 
and godly inspiration which calls him from 
darkness to light, crying with all his heart to his 
Creator, "O my Lord, help me, help me 



/ 



7 



g6 OF FR UITLESS RESOL UTIONS 

speedily ; leave me not any longer in this dark- 
ness of sin." Let him never grow weary of 
repeating this prayer, and of others like it, but 
cry over and over again. 

And, if possible, let him have recourse without 
a moment's delay to some spiritual father, and 
ask for counsel and assistance, that he may be 
delivered from the Enemy. 

But if this cannot be done at once, let him 
promptly cast himself before the Crucified, and 
there prostrating himself at His Sacred Feet, let 
him cry for mercy, and ask also for the pity and 
aid of the Mother of God. 

And be assured that in doing this immediately, 
lies the victory, as you will learn from the next 
chapter. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

SDf t!)e mUt^ ann Deru^ionia! lip toljicl^ tlje Deijil 
tioltija! captibe t!jo0e iuTjo arc t(\xiHiQH^ of t^ieir 
(59igierp, anti nejsi'rc to be free j ann l^oto it ijai our 
Hc0orutioTi0 are 00 often fruitfcgd. 

THOSE who know their evil life, and desire 
to change it, are often ensnared and 
overcome by the Devil by such weapons as 
these : — 

" Not now, not now." 



\ 



OF FR UITLESS RESOL UTIONS 9 7 

" Cras, eras," is the raven's cry (" to-morrow, 
to-morrow'*). " I must first settle this or that, 
arrange my affairs, remove this obstacle, and 
then I shall be able to attend to spiritual mat- 
ters with greater tranquillity." 

This is a snare which has caught, and still 
catches a vast number of people ; and its success 
arises from our own negligence and carelessness, 
which make us, in a business in which both the 
honour of God and the salvation of our soul 
are at stake, so slow to seize that most powerful 
weapon "Now, now," wherefore "not now?" 

"To-day, to-day," wherefore "to-morrow?" 
saying to yourself, "Even supposing this *by 
and by,* this * to-morrow,' be granted me, is it a 
safe course, and the way of victory, to choose 
first to be wounded and to be guilty of fresh 
irregularities ? ** 

You see, then, beloved, that to escape this 
snare, and to overcome the enemy, the remedy 
is, as has been already mentioned, instant cor- 
respondence with the Divine suggestions and 
inspirations; ready obedience to them, I say, 
and not mere resolves, for these often are decep- 
tive, and many from various causes have re- 
mained deceived by them. 

The first reason is, as above referred to, that 
our good resolves are not based upon self-distrust 
and trust in God. Our excessive pride — which 



// 




98 OP PR UITLESS RESOL UTIONS 

is the source of this delusion and blindness — 
hinders us from discovering this. The light 
which discloses the evil and the medicine which 
cures it, both come from the goodness of God, 
Who suffers us to fall that He may lead us from 
, trust in self to trust in Him Alone, and from 
I pride to self-knowledge. 

Your resolutions, therefore, to be effectual, 
must be firmly made ; and this they cannot be, 
unless they are freed from all trust in self, and 
are humbly based upon trust in God. 

The second reason is, that when we make our 
resolutions, we dwell on the beauty and value 
of virtue, and these draw out our will, frail and 
slack as it is ; but when we come to face the 
difficulties which must be surmounted before 
the virtue can be attained, our will, being weak 
and inexperienced, fails, and shrinks back from 
the effort. 

Accustom yourself, therefore, to love the 
difficulties which accompany the attainment of 
virtues, even more than the virtues themselves ; 
and use these difficulties, now a little and now 
much, so as to strengthen your will, if you really 
desire to acquire these virtues. Know also, 
that the more generously you embrace and 
value these difficulties, the more speedy and 
complete shall be your victory over yourself and 
your enemies. 



7 



OF GOING ON TO PERFECTION 99 

The third reason is, that in making our resolu- 
tions we are prone to keep in view not the 
virtue and the Divine Will, but our own interest. 
This is often the case with resolutions which 
we form in times of spiritual joy or crushing 
trial, when we feel nothing bring us relief, but 
the resolve to give ourselves wholly to God, and 
to the practice of virtue. 

In order to avoid this danger, be in times of 
spiritual delight very cautious and humble in 
your resolutions, and especially as to promises 
and vows. And in trial, let your resolutions be 
to bear your cross patiently, according to the 
Will of God, and to exalt it, refusing all earthly 
and sometimes even heavenly consolation. Let 
your one desire and your one prayer be, that 
God would enable you to bear all adversity 
without marring the virtue of patience, and 
without any thing that may displease your Lord. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

SDf t\^t jDcUijSion of x^q^z ioTjo imaofine t^at tl^e)? are 
going on to Perfection. 

OUR Enemy, when he is repulsed in his first 
and second assault and stratagem, has 
in his malice recourse to a third, which is, to 
keep our eyes fixed on some higher degree of 



7 



\ 



lOO OF GOING ON TO PERFECTION 

perfection, making us aspire to and aim after it, 
and thus rendering us forgetful of the enemies 
who are close at hand and are actually assault- 
ing and injuring us. 

Hence we are continually wounded, but pay 
no regard to our wounds ; and, estimating our 
intentions as if they were fulfilled, we are filled 
with various feelings of pride. 

Thus, while we will not brook the least con- 
tradiction of word or deed, we spend our time 
in making long meditations and resolutions 
about bearing sufferings sharper than those 
which shall be hereafter, for the love of God. 
And because our lower nature, in the case of 
pains which are so far off, feels no repugnance 
to them, therefore do we poor creatures flatter 
ourselves, that we are already to be classed with 
those who endure agonies patiently. 

To avoid this snare, resolve to fight against 
those enemies who are close at hand, and are 
really attacking you. You will in this way 
discover whether your resolutions are true or 
deceptive, strong or frail; and you will travel on 
towards virtue and perfection, by the well-beaten 
and royal road. 

But with regard to enemies who are not now 
wont to harass you, unless you foresee that 
they are likely at some time hence to do so, I do 
not advise you to offer battle ; you may, how- 



\ 



OF THE DEVIL^S DECEITS lOI 

ever, make resolutions beforehand, that you may 
then be found prepared and strong. 

Let not your resolutions be estimated by 
their effects, even though you should have long 
and rightly exercised yourself in virtue, but be 
humble as to them, and distrust yourself and 
your own weakness ; and, putting your trust in 
God, with frequent prayers, fly to Him for suc- 
cour and protection from dangers, and especially 
from the danger of the very least presumption 
and self-confidence. 

But in the case of slight defects, which some- 
times the Lord permits to remain uncpnquered 
in order to increase our self-knowledge or to 
guard some other good in us, it is notwithstand- 
ing allowable to form resolutions of attaining to 
some higher degree of perfection. 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

©f tl^e T>t\yiV^ Deceits antj ^tru^gle^ to urate n0 
atoap from tl^e patT) of Perfection. 

THE fourth deceit of the Evil One, as I have 
already mentioned, is to excite within us, 
when he sees us steadily advancing in holiness, 
sundry good desires, in order to lead us from 
the practice of virtues into wickedness. 

A sick person, for instance, is bearing his 



7 




7 



I02 OF THE DEVII^S DECEITS 

illness all the while with a patient will. Our 
cunning adversary, knowing that the sick man 
may thus attain to the habit of patience, suggests 
at once to him how much good he might have 
done under different circumstances, and per- 
suades him that in health he would have served 
God, and have benefited himself and others, to 
a greater extent Having excited these thoughts 
within him, he goes on increasing them by 
degrees, till at last he makes him restless at not 
being able to carry these desires into good effect. 

The keener and stronger such desires become 
the more this restlessness increases. Then, im- 
perceptibly and artfully, the Enemy leads him on 
to impatience under his sickness, not on account 
of the sickness itself, but because of the hindrance 
the sickness becomes to those good works which 
the sick man so anxiously desires to perform 
for some greater good. 

Having led him on thus far, with the same 
subtlety he withdraws from his mind the end he 
had in view, of serving God and doing good 
works, leaving only the bare desire to be cured 
of his sickness ; and then, when this desire is 
not granted him, he is vexed, and becomes actu- 
ally impatient about it. Thus, insensibly he falls 
from the virtue of which he was acquiring the 
habit, into the opposite vice. 

This is the way to guard against and resist this 



\ 



OF THE DEVII^S DECEITS I03 

snare. Be very careful not to allow, when in 
this state of trial, any desires or projects which 
you cannot at once carry into effect, and which 
on that account are likely to disturb you. 

In this case resign yourself with all patience, 
humility, and resignation to the conviction that 
your desires may after all not have the effect which 
you supposed, inasmuch as you are weaker and 
more unstable than you thought yourself to be. 

Or else think that perhaps God, in His secret 
counsels, or for your unworthiness, does not 
intend you to do this good work, but rather in- 
tends you to patiently humble and abase yourself 
under the loving and mighty hand of His Will. 

In like manner, when your spiritual father 
hinders you, or some other cause, from such fre- 
quent attendance at your devotions, and espe- 
cially the Holy Communion, as you would wish, 
do not allow yourself to be vexed and disturbed 
on that account, but give up entirely your own 
mind, and be clothed with the good pleasure of 
your Lord, and say — "If the eye of Divine 
Providence did not discover in me some ingra- 
titude or defect, I should not now be debarred 
from receiving this most Holy Sacrament. I see 
that my Lord thus makes known to me my un- 
worthiness, and therefore I will praise and bless 
His Name for ever. I am fully persuaded, O 
my Lord, that in Thy infinite Goodness Thou 



// 



I04 OF THE DEVIL^S DECEITS 

wilt grant me a heart open and ready to do all 
Thy good pleasure with resignation and obedi- 
ence, and that Thou, coming to me spiritually, 
wilt comfort and strengthen it against all the 
enemies who would fain separate it from Thee. 
Thus may it be, as it seems good in Thy Sight 
O my Creator and Redeemer, may Thy Will be 
now and evermore my food and support ! This 
only do I ask of Thee, O my Beloved, that my 
soul, cleansed and purified from every thing that 
is displeasing in Thy Sight, and adorned with 
holy virtues, may be ever prepared for Thy 
coming, and for the performance of Thy Will, 
whatsoever it may be." 

If you will bear in mind these warnings, know 
assuredly, that when baffled in any good which 
you had proposed to do — ^whether the hindrance 
be from your own nature, or from the Evil Spirit's 
endeavour to distress you and turn you aside 
from the path of holiness, or from God Himself for 
a trial of your submission to His Will — you will 
always find an opportunity of pleasing your Lord 
in some way most acceptable to Him. And in 
this lies that true devotion and service which 
God requires of us. 

I caution you, fiirther, lest you grow impatient 
under trials, from whatsoever source they spring, 
that, in using the lawful means which God's 
servants are wont to resort to, you do not employ 




\ 



OF THE DEVII^S DECEITS lOS 

them simply with the hope and desire of gaining 
relief, but because it is the Will of God that you 
should use them ; for we know not whether it 
will please His Divine Majesty by this means 
to free us from our troubles. From any other 
way of acting you will fall into further evils ; for 
if the thing did not turn out according to your 
mind and desire, you would easily grow im- 
patient, or your patience would have some de- 
fect about it, and not be wholly pleasing to 
God, and would be of little worth. 

Lastly, I would warn you against a hidden 
deceit of our self-love, which is wont under 
certain circumstances to excuse and justify our 
faults. Thus, for example, a sick man, who is 
very impatient under his affliction, conceals his 
impatience under the cloak of zeal for some 
apparent good. He says that his vexation does 
not arise from real impatience at the pain he has 
to suffer in consequence of the disease, but is a 
reasonable grief, because he has brought it upon 
himself, or else because others who wait on him 
are being worn out and injured. 

Thus the ambitious man, who frets that he 
has failed to gain some honour, does not attribute 
his discontent to his own wounded pride, but to 
certain other causes, which he knows very well, 
at another time when they did not bring trouble 
upon himself, would give him no concern ; so 



7 



7 



Io6 OF THE OCCASIONS OF OUR RUIN 

neither would the sick man care, if those about 
whom he has expressed so much sorrow for their 
fatigue on his behalf, had incurred the same 
amount of labour and hurt in waiting upon some 
one else. This is a clear proof that the root of 
such men's sorrow is not their concern for others, 
or for any thing else, but their dislike to have 
their own will thwarted. 

Therefore, in order to escape this and other 
errors, bear with patience every trouble and 
sorrow, as I have told you, from whatever cause 
it may spring. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

flDf tl^e Ia0t atiotje^namet 9l0giault atm Stratagem, 
to|)ere!ip t\)t DetJil ttit^ to malfee tl^e ([Iirtue0 ioc 
l^afte acquireu tl^e flDcca0ionj5i of our Huin. 

THE crafty and malicious serpent fails not 
to tempt us by his subtle devices through 
the virtues we have acquired. With these he 
would work our ruin, by inducing us to think too 
much of them or of ourselves, and thus would 
lead us to lift up ourselves on high, and thereby 
to fall into the sin of pride and vain-glory. 

To protect yourself from this danger, always 
fight your own battle, placing yourself on the 
safe and level ground of a true and deep convic- 



\ 



OF THE OCCASIONS OF OUR RUIN lO? 

tibn that you are nothing, that you know nothing, 
that you can do nothing, and that you have 
nothing of your own but misery and imperfection, 
and that you deserve nothing but eternal dam- 
nation. 

Secure and entrench yourself within the 
bounds of this truth, and never suffer yourself to 
be drawn aside one single hair's-breadth from it, 
by any thought or any events which may happen 
to you, being convinced that such are only so 
many enemies who want to slay and wound you, 
if they could only get you into their hands. 

If you would exercise yourself well in this 
field of the knowledge of your own nothingness, 
use the following rule : — 

Whenever you are occupied with the thought 
of yourself or of your own doings, ever reflect 
upon what you are of yourself, and not upon what 
is of God and of His grace ; and then estimate 
yourself, according to that only which you are of 
yourself. 

If you consider the time before you were 
created, you will see that through all that abyss 
of eternity you were absolutely nothing, and that 
you did nothing, and could in no way minister 
to your own creation. 

And now, through the Goodness of God 
only, having been created, if you leave to Hini 
that which is His-r--His continual Government, 



/ 




Io8 OF THE OCCASIONS OF OUR RUIN 

whereby He sustains you every moment — ^^vhat 
are you of yourself now but still equally nothing ? 

For it is certain, that, if He were for the 
slightest moment to withdraw from you, you 
would return to your original nothingness, out 
of which His Almighty Hand drew you. It is 
clear, then, that you have no ground in this 
natural being, viewed by itself alone, either for 
thinking highly of yourself, or for wishing others 
to think highly of you. 

As to that blessed gift of grace within you, or 
the good works you have been enabled to per- 
form, what good or meritorious action could you 
by your natural strength have ever done, if you 
had been deprived of Divine assistance ? 

If, on the other hand, you call to mind the 
number of your past faults, and the multitude of 
sins of which, but for the merciful Hand of God 
holding you back, you would also have been 
guilty, you will find, by reckoning up the days 
and years as well as the acts and habits of sin 
(for one vice draws another after it) that your 
iniquities will have become, as it were, innumer- 
able, so that you would be changed into another 
infernal Lucifer. If, therefore, you would not 
rob God of His Glory, but ever cleave to your 
Lord, you must learn day by day to think 
worse of yourself. 

Be careful to deal honestly in the judgment 



7 



\ 



OF THE OCCASIONS OF OUR RUIN I09 

you pass upon yourself, or else you may incur 
no little harm. For although by this knowledge 
of your own wickedness you may surpass another, 
who in his blindness imagines himself to be 
something, yet you will lose much, and make 
yourself worse than he is in the motives of your 
heart, if you desire to be esteemed by men, and 
to pass for that which you know you are not. 

If, then, you wish that this knowledge of your 
sinfulness and vileness may protect you from 
your enemies, and make you dear to God, you 
must not only strive to despise yourself, as 
unworthy of all good, and deserving of all evil, 
but you must love to be despised by others, detest- 
ing their compliments, delighting in their blame, 
and stooping, whenever an opportunity offers, to 
do that which others regard with contempt. 

And, lest you should be deterred from this 
wholesome exercise, pay no account to the judg- 
ment which others niay form of you, but go on 
with what you are doing, with the simple view of 
your own self-abasement and discipline; beware, 
however, of that presumptuous spirit and subtle 
pride, which oftentimes, under some specious pre- 
text, causes us to disregard the opinions of others. 

Keep firm and recollected within yourself, if 
at any time it should happen to you to be loved, 
or regarded as good by others, for some grace 
which God has bestowed upon you, and do 



/ 




no OF THE OCCASIONS OF OUR RUIN 

not allow yourself to be drawn aside one step 
from that which is true and right as to your own 
nothingness, but turn first to God, and say to 
Him from your heart, " Keep me, O Lord, from 
ever robbing Thee of Thy Glory and Grace. To 
Thee be praise, honour, and glory, but to me 
confusion of face.'* Then, turning to him who is 
praising you, say inwardly, as if addressing him— 
" How is it that he regards me as good, when in 
reality my God Alone and His works are good ?" 

Humble yourself in this manner, and give to 
the Lord that which is His own, and thus you 
will put to flight your enemies, and fit yourself 
to receive greater gifts and favours from God. 

And if you are tempted to vanity by looking 
back upon some good works you have done, 
regard them at once as God's works, and not 
your own, and say in your heart, as if address- 
ing them — " I know not how ye did appear or 
begin to be in my mind, for ye did not derive 
your origin from me; but the good God and 
His Grace created, nourished and preserved 
you. Him only, then, will I acknowledge as 
your true and first Father, Him will I thank, and 
to Him will I give all praise on your account 

Consider, then, that not only do all the works 
which you have done fall short of the light and 
grace which has been bestowed upon you, in 
order that you may have the knowledge and 



7 



\ 



OF THE OCCASIONS OF OUR ^UIN II I 

power to do them, hut that they are exceedingly 
imperfect, and greatly lack that pure intention, 
proper care and fervency, accompanied with 
which they should be wrought. 

If you will look at them in this light, you will 
find cause for shame rather than complacency, 
for it is but too true that the graces which were 
pure and perfect when they came from God are 
sullied by our imperfect use of them. 

After this, compare your works with those of 
the Saints, and other servants of God; for by 
such a comparison you will clearly see that your 
best and greatest deeds are of much baser metal, 
and of little worth. 

Then, proceed to compare them with those 
which Christ wrought for you in the Mysteries of 
His Life and of His continuous Cross ; consider 
His works in themselves apart from His Divinity, 
and in the affection and purity of that love with 
which He wrought them, and you will clearly 
see that all your works are precisely nothing. 

And lastly, if you will lift up your thoughts to 
the Divinity and boundless Majesty of your 
God, and to the service which He deserves, 
you will plainly perceive, that the amount of 
what you have done for Him ought rather to be 
a ground of considerable fear than of vanity. 
Therefore, in all your ways, in all your works, 
however holy they may be, you must cry unto 




112 OF THE OCCASIONS OF OUR RUIN 

the Lord with all your heart : " God, be merciful 
to me, a sinner.'* 

I would further counsel you to be reserved in 
speaking of the gifts which God has given you, j 
for to publish them is almost always displeasing 
to your Lord, as He Himself clearly teaches us 
in the following lesson. 

Appearing, as it is said, once to a devout and 
pure creature of His in the form of a little child, 
she asked him, with much simplicity, to repeat 
the Angelical Salutation. He at once began : 
** Hail, Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee, 
blessed art thou among women;" then He 
stopped, unwilling to praise Himself in the 
words which follow. And whilst she was urging 
Him to proceed. He withdrew from her, leaving 
His servant full of consolation, because of the 
heavenly doctrine which, by His example, He 
had taught her. 

Do you also, beloved, learn to humble yourself, 
and to acknowledge yourself to be nothing, and 
your works to be nothing also. This is the 
foundation of all other virtues. 

God, when we had no being, created us out of 
nothing ; and now that through Him we have a 
being, He wills that the whole spiritual fabric 
should be based on this foundation, namely, the 
knowledge of our own nothingness. And the 
deeper this knowledge becomes, the higher will 



OF THE OCCASIONS OF OUR RUIN 



"3 



the building rise. And according as we dig out 
the earth of our own wretchedness, so much the 
more will the Divine Architect bring the most 
solid stones to advance the building. 

Never imagine, beloved, that you can ever 
dig deep enough ; but, on the contrary, believe 
this of yourself, that if any thing in a creature 
could be infinite, it would be your vileness. 

With this knowledge, practically carried out, we 
possess all good ; without it, we should be little 
better than nothing, though we had done all the 
works of the Saints, and were ourselves con- 
tinually occupied with God. 

blessed knowledge, which makes us happy 
on earth and glorious in Heaven ! O light, 
which rises out of darkness, and brightly illumi- 
nates the soul ! O unspeakable joy, which shines 
amidst our impurities! O nothingness, which, 
when known, puts all things in our power ! 

1 should never tire of telling you this: — if 
you will praise God, accuse yourself, and desire 
to be accused by others. Humble yourself with 
all, and bend beneath all, if you would exalt 
Him in yourself and yourself in Him. If you 
would find Him, exalt not yourself, for if you 
do, He will fly from you. 

Abase yourself, abase yourself to the utmost, 
and He will seek you and embrace you ; arid 
the more you humble yourself in your own sight, 



t 



IT4 OF THE OCCASIONS OF OUR RUIN 

and are content to be regarded as worthless by 
others, and to be cast aside as an abominable 
thing, the more tenderly and lovingly will He 
welcome you and draw you to His Side. 

Reckon yourself unworthy of this so great a 
gift which God vouchsafes to you, Who, to unite 
you to Himself, suffered shame for your sake. 
Fail not to render to Him continual thanks, 
and consider yourself under an obligation to 
those who have given you an opportunity of 
humbHng yourself, and still more to those who 
have trampled upon you, and who, in addition 
to this, think that you are not taking it well, but 
badly. And, even if it is so, you ought to hide 
the feeling. 

If, notwithstanding all these considerations, 
which are but too tme, the subtlety of the Devil, 
and our own ignorance and bad inclinations, 
should so prevail within us, that thoughts of our 
own superiority still disquiet us, and will make 
their impressions on our hearts, then from that 
very fact we may draw an argument for humbling 
ourselves in our own eyes; for such thoughts 
show us that we are far behind in the spiritual 
life, and in the true knowledge of ourselves, 
seeing that we are unable to shake off these 
annoyances which spring from our empty pride. 
By this means, from the poison we may extract 
honey, from the wounds the cure. 



\ 



OF OVERCOMING OUR EVIL PASSIONS 115 ' 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

flDf certain ^ugorejstionisi for oijercoming our Cbil 
pa00toti0, anQ gainino: nciu Gtrtucis. 

AI^THOUGH I have already said so much 
of the means whereby we may overcome 
self, and adorn ourselves with virtues, I will yet 
give you some further cautions. 

First, in your endeavours after holiness, 
never be persuaded to adopt that routine of 
spiritual exercises, which divides tlie week, so 
as to set apart one day for one particular virtue, 
and another day for another ; but let the order 
of your warfare and exercises be, to war against 
those passions which have been always injuring 
you, and which still often attack and injure you, 
and to adorn yourself with the virtues which are 
opposite to them, as perfectly as possible. 

For when you have gained these virtues, you 
will have no difficulty in acquiring the rest, as 
occasion offers and occasions will present them- 
selves, inasmuch as all the virtues are so inter- 
Imked one with another that you cannot possess 
one perfectly without having all the rest already, 
as it were, on the threshold of your heart 

Secondly, never set a fixed time for the 
attainment of virtues, nor say that you will gain 




1 16 OF OVERCOMING OUR EVIL PASSIONS 

them in so many days, weeks, or years ; but, as 
an infant or a newly-enlisted soldier, fight your 
way, and push forward towards the summit of 
perfection. 

Do not ever stand still, even for an instant ; 
for to stand still in the way of virtue and perfec- 
tion, is not to recover breath or courage, but to 
relapse and grow feebler than before. 

By standing still, I mean making yourself 
believe that you have perfectly gained the virtue, 
and thus that you need pay little attention to 
the occasions which may call you to new acts 
of the virtue, or to slight failures in it. 

Therefore be vigilant, fervent, and careful, so 
as not to miss the least opportunity of exercising 
a virtue. Embrace every occasion which may 
lead to it, and especially those which excel 
in difficulty, because acts which are most diffi- 
cult to be performed are those which most 
quickly and thoroughly establish the habit; 
therefore love those who offer you such oppor- 
tunities. 

But flee those only, and that with rapid step, 
with all haste and diligence, which may lead to 
temptations of the flesh. 

Thirdly, be prudent and discreet concerning 
those exercises which may prove injurious to 
your bodily health, such as self-chastisement 
with disciplines, haircloth, fastings, vigils^ medi- 



\ 



OF OVERCOMING OUR EVIL PASSIONS 1 1 7 

tations, and the like ; for these practices must 
be discreetly and slowly acquired, as we shall 
presently show. 

Then as to virtues which are wholly internal, 
such as love of God, contempt of the world, 
self-abasement, hatred of evil passions and sin, 
patience and meekness, love for all men, even 
for those who injure us, and such like ; it is 
not necessary to attain to these by degrees, nor 
to mount with gradual rise to perfection in them, 
but strive at once to make each act as perfect 
as possible. 

Fourthly, let your whole mind, desire, and 
heart be set upon, wish for, and long for nothing 
but to gain the victory over the passion against 
which you are struggling, and to form the opposite 
virtue. Be this your world, your heaven, your 
earth, your whole treasure ; and all with the 
view of pleasing God. Whether you are eating 
or fasting, labouring or resting, watching or 
sleeping, at home or abroad, whether engaged in 
devotion or in manual labour, let your aim be 
to overcome and subdue this passion, and to 
gain the opposite virtue. 

Fifthly, be the foe of all earthly pleasures and 
gratifications, and in this way you will weaken the 
power of all vices, which have their root in the 
love of pleasure. Therefore, when this is cut away 
by hatred of self, they lose their vigour and force. 



T 



1 18 OF OVERCOMING OUR EVIL PASSIONS 

For if whilst you on the one hand fight against 
a particular indulgence, and on the other attach 
yourself to some earthly delight (though it 
amount only to a venial fault), hard will be the 
battle, and bloody, and the victory rare and 
very uncertain. 

Therefore bear in mind those divine utter- 
ances : — " He that loveth his life shall lose it, 
and he that hateth his life in this world shall 
keep it unto life eternal." St, John xii. 25. 
"Brethren, we are debtors not to the flesh, 
to live after the flesh. For if ye live after the 
flesh ye shall die ; but if ye through the spirit 
do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live." 
Rom, viii. 12. 

Sixthly, my last advice is, that you should 
make a general confession, for this, perhaps, you 
will find necessary at first, observing all that is 
required for doing it well ; so shall you be more 
certain that you are in your Lord's favour, from 
Whom alone all graces and all victories must 
be looked for. 



\ 



OF A TTENTIVE EXERCISE OF VIR TUES 1 1 9 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

€lbat GirtuejEi are to !ie g:aineti !)? Degree^, !ip ^jcer* 
ciising our0etl)e0 in tl^ci'r gratiuat formation, anti 
tlbat our attention ntujst fir^t !je giben to one 
step, ann tl^en to anottier. 

ALTHOUGH the true soldier of Christ, who 
aspires to the height of perfection, should 
not assign limits to his progress, still there are 
some forms of spiritual fervour which need to 
be checked with a certain discretion, lest, being 
ardently embraced at first, they should be soon 
exhausted, and thus desert us in the middle of 
our course. Therefore, besides what has been 
said about moderation in external exercises, we 
must also learn, that even interior virtues had 
better be acquired by degrees, and step by step; 
for in this way that which is small soon becomes 
great and abiding. Thus, for example, we should 
not as a rule practise patience in the high degree, 
which consists in rejoicing in afflictions and 
desiring them, before we have passed through 
the lower degrees of the virtue. 

Neither do I advise you to endeavour to give 
your attention to all the virtues at once, but to 
one only, and afterwards to others ; for thus 
the habit of virtue is more easily and firmly 




i 



1 20 OF A TTENTIVE EXERCISE OF VIR TUES 

rooted in the soul. If you are striving to acquire 
one particular virtue, you remember it more 
readily on all occasions; your mind too is 
sharpened by the discovery of new ways and 
motives for cultivating it, and the will bends 
itself more easily and earnestly in the pursuit of 
it, than if it were occupied with many virtues at 
once. 

And with this uniform exercise, the acts which 
concern one single virtue are performed with less 
fatigue, in consequence of their resemblance to 
one another. The performance of one act &cili- 
tates the performance of the next, which is like 
unto it; and by this common likeness they 
make a deeper impression on us, the seat of the 
heart being already prepared and disposed for 
receiving those which are newly produced, having 
already made room for similar acts before. 

These reasons have the greater force, as it is 
quite certain that every one who practises him- 
self in one virtue at the same time learns the 
exercise of the rest ; and thus, through the in- 
separable bond which exists between them, 
when one virtue grows the rest increase with it, 
as rays proceeding from one and the same 
Divine Light 



\ 



OF THE MEANS OF ACQUIRING VIRTUES 121 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

Of tT)C ^eanjs bp ixitiicTj C3irtue0 are acquired, anu of 
i^t CKap toe ^l^outB 2l0e tl^em, aHotofiiff 0ome 
iBipace of ®me to one Qirtue onfp. 

FOR the pursuit of virtues, besides all that 
has been said above, we need a large and 
generous mind ; a will, neither unstable nor re- 
miss, but resolute and strong, with the certain 
persuasion that many hindrances and trials have 
to be overcome. 

There are, moreover, particular inclinations 
and affections which we may gain, by frequently 
considering how pleasing they are to God, how 
noble and excellent in themselves, and how 
profitable and necessary for us, for from them 
all perfection has its origin and end. 

Each morning, then, make a stedfast resolve 
to exercise yourself in them during the day, 
according to the events which are likely to 
happen during the day ; and often, as it passes, 
examine yourself in order to see whether you 
have kept your resolution or not ; and renew it 
with fresh earnestness. And this should be done 
especially with regard to the particular virtue 
which we are endeavouring to acquire. 

Let the examples of the Saints, and our medi- 



/ 



K 



7 



122 OF THE MEANS OF ACQUIRING VIRTUES 

tations and prayers on the Life and Passion of 
Christ (so needful in every spiritual exercise), 
be all applied principally to the virtue which we 
have made it our task to practise. 

Let the same be done on all occasions (as we 
shall presently explain more particularly), how- 
ever different they may be from one another. 

Let us take pains to accustom ourselves to 
interior and exterior acts of virtue, that we may 
be enabled to perform them with the same 
facility and readiness, as we did those which 
accorded with our natural will. And (as we 
have said elsewhere) the more these acts are 
contrary to the natural will, the more quickly 
will they produce the good habit in the soul. 

The sacred words of the Divine Scriptures, 
uttered by the voice, or at least with the mind, 
and selected according to the occasion, have a 
wonderful power to aid us in this exercise. 

We ought therefore to keep such texts in 
readiness as bear upon the virtue we are practis- 
ing, and let them be repeated during the day, 
especially whenever the opposite passion begins 
to assert itself. 

Thus, for example, if we are trying to gain 
patience, we can use the following words, or 
others like them : — 

" My children, suffer patiently the wrath that 
is come upon you from God.'* Baruch x. 25. 



I 

\ 



OF THE MEANS OF ACQUIRING VIRTUES 1 23 

" The expectation of the poor shall not perish 
for ever." Fsaim ix. i8. 

" He that is slow to anger is better than the 
mighty; and he that nileth his spirit than he 
that taketh a city." Proverbs xvi. 32. 

" In your patience possess ye your souls." St. 
Luke xxi. 19. 

" Let us run with patience the race that is set 
before us." Hebrews xii. i. 

For the same purpose we may say the follow- 
ing, or some similar short prayers : — 

" When, O my God, shall this heart of mine 
be armed with the shield of patience ? " 

" When, to content my Lord, shall I be able 
to endure every trial with an undisturbed mind ?" 

** Oh ! sufferings most precious, which make 
me like my Lord Jesus, enduring the Passion 
for me !'* 

" Oh ! Only Life of my soul, will it ever come 
to pass that I could live in contentment amidst 
a thousand torments for Thy Glory!" 

" Happy should I be, if in the midst of the 
furnace of affliction, I could still bum with the 
desire of enduring greater things !" 

We should use these short prayers, or others 
like them, which help towards the attainment of 
virtues, and are calculated to cherish the spirit 
of devotion. 

These short prayers are called ejaculations, 



/ 



^ 



7 



1 24 OF DILIGENT ADVANCE IN VIRTUE 

because they are shot like darts or arrows 
towards Heaven. 

They have a great effect upon us, stirring us to 
virtue, and penetrate even to the heart of God, if 
they have, so to speak, these two wings : — one, 
a true knowledge that God is pleased with such 
spiritual exercises ; the other, a true and ardent 
desire after holiness with the sole end of pleas- 
ing His Divine Majesty. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

Cl()at in tlie Cjcerciise of Qirtue Uje mujsit conttnuaTTp 
auijaiTcc toitl^ SDiHffcnce. 

AMONGST the things which are most im- 
portant and necessary for the attainment 
of virtues, besides those already taught, this is to 
be borne in mind; — that we must uninterruptedly 
press forward towards the end we have purposed; 
else, by only standing still, we turn back. 

For as soon as we leave off acts of virtue, it 
follows of necessity, that, by the violent inclina- 
tion of the sensual appetite and the action of ex- 
ternal objects, many unruly passions are raised 
in us, which impair or destroy holiness; and, 
besides that, we lose many graces and gifts, 
which, if we had continued to press onward, we 
might have gained from the Lord. In this re- 



\ 



OF DILIGENT ADVANCE IN VIR TUE 1 25 

spect the spiritual traveller is unlike the one who 
performs an earthly journey, for the latter may 
rest without losing the ground he has gained, 
while with the former this would be impossible. 
There is another difference too between them : 
the weariness of the earthly traveller increases 
with the continuance of the bodily exertion, 
while in the spiritual journey, the longer the 
traveller walks the more strength and vigour he 
gains. For by the habit of virtue, the lower 
nature, which by its rebellion at first makes the 
way rough and toilsome, is gradually weakened ; 
while the higher nature, in which virtue resides, 
gets more firm and more robust. 

Therefore, as we progress in holiness, the 
pain which we felt lessens, and a certain secret 
joy, which, by the Divine working had inter- 
mingled with it, increases more and more. 

In this way, by steadily going on from one 
virtue to another, we arrive at last at the summit 
of the mountain, where the perfected soul can 
work without weariness, nay, with pleasure and 
joyfiilness ; because, having now conquered and 
tamed its unruly passions, and having risen 
above all created things and above itself, it 
lives happily in the Heart of the Most High, 
and there, sweetly labouring, finds its repose. 



7 




7 



126 OF SHUNNING OPPOR TUNJTJES 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 

tJCl&at a0 ioe mu0t aliuap^ continue in t%t ^xnci^t of 
t|)e 33irtue0, 00 toe mujst not jsljun anp SDppor* 
tunitp tot)icl& ofFeriai itself for tT;eir Attainment. 

WE have clearlyseen, that in the path of holi- 
ness we must ever press onward without 
stopping. Therefore we ought to be watchful and 
expectant, lest we let slip any opportunity which 
may present itself for the increase of a virtue ; 
and those who draw back from such contrary 
things as might serve to that purpose, make 
a great mistake. 

For if you desire (not to depart from the 
virtue which has provided us with an example 
hitherto) to grow in the habit of patience, it is 
not well to keep away from the persons, deeds, 
or thoughts, which try your patience. 

Therefore you have no need to give up any 
of your associations, because they are tiresome 
to you; but whilst you are dealing with and 
concerned with whatever brings you annoyance, 
keep your will disposed and ready to endure 
whatever vexation or unpleasantness may come 
to you; else you will never get the habit of 
patience. 

If any employment be irksome to you, either 



\ 



OF SHUNNING OPPOR TUNJTIES 1 2 7 

on its own account, or because of the person 
who laid it on you ; or, if you dislike it, because 
it hinders you from doing what you like better, 
still undertake it and complete it, whatever 
trouble it be to you, and though you might find 
comfort by not doing it. Because if you leave it, 
you would never learn to suffer, neither would 
true peace ever be your portion, as it does not 
spring except from a soul purified from passion 
and adorned with holiness. 

The same holds good of harassing thoughts, 
which at times molest and disturb the mind. 
You need not drive them entirely away, for, 
together with the pain they cause you, they 
accustom you to bear contradictions. Whoever 
gives you different advice, teaches you rather to 
shun the pain you feel, than to gain the virtue 
which you desire. 

True, indeed, it is that a young soldier ought 
to manoeuvre and guard himself with watchful- 
ness and dexterity on such occasions, now fac- 
ing the enemy, now retiring, as he gains more 
or less spiritual strength and power; yet he 
must never quite turn away and retreat, so as 
to place himself far from all opportunity of con- 
tradiction : for though for the time he might save 
himself from falling, in the future he would run 
a greater risk, when exposed to the assaults of 
impatience, from not having armed and strength- 



7 




128 OF EMBRACING OPPOR TUNITIES 

ened himself beforehand with the practice of 
the contrary virtue. 

This advice, however, must not be followed 
when sins of the flesh are concerned, of which 
we have before spoken more particularly. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

€|iat toe oujyl^t to regart a0 prcciouig etierp 2Dppor» 
tuttitp to|)iclb i0 affortcu to U0 for t%t acquisition 
of Virtues 5 ant cfjicftp tl)oj3e to!)ic|i present tl^e 
greatest Difficulties. 

THAT you should accept the opportunities 
which present themselves of acquiring 
virtue is not enough, beloved ; you should also 
sometimes seek them, as things of great price 
and value, and ever ehibrace them joyfully as 
soon as they appear ; and the more distasteful 
they are to nature, the more dear and precious 
should they be esteemed. This, by the Divine 
assistance, you will be enabled to do, if you will 
bear in mind the following considerations. 

One is, that opportunities are means adapted, 
nay, necessary for acquiring virtues. Hence, 
when you are seeking virtues from the Lord, 
you are by a necessary consequence asking also 
for opportunities, else your prayer would be vain, 
and you would be contradicting your own 



\ 



OF EM BR A CING OP FOR TUN J TIES 1 2 9 

words and tempting God, for He ordinarily does 
not give patience without tribulation, nor humility 
without humiliations. 

The same may be said of all other virtues, 
which are doubtless only to be gained by adverse 
circumstances ; and the more painful these are, 
the more effectually do they aid us, and there- 
fore the more acceptable and welcome should 
they be. 

For acts of virtue, done in such cases, are 
more heroic and generous, and more easily and 
quickly open to us the way to holiness. 

But even the slightest opportunity, though 
but a word or look, which crosses our will, 
should be prized and not allowed to pass unused ; 
for such acts, though less intense than those 
made in the face of considerable difficulties, are 
more frequent. 

Another consideration (of which I have 
already spoken) is, that everything which 
happens to us comes from God for our good, and 
in order that we may turn it to account 

And although (as we have elsewhere said) 
some things spring from our own defects, and 
those of others, and therefore cannot be said to 
be of God, Who wills nothing that is sinful, yet 
are they from God, inasmuch as He permits 
them, and does not prevent them, though He 
has it in His power to do so. 



/ 




T 



130 QF EM BR A CING OPPOR TUNITIES 

But all sorrows and afflictions, whether they 
are the result of our own fault, or of the malice of 
others, are both from God, and of God ; because 
He concurs in them, and that which He 
would not have us do as being utterly hateful 
and abominable in His most pure eyes. He yet 
wills that we should suffer, both for our quicker 
growth, in holiness, and for other wise reasons 
unknown to us. 

If, then, it is most certainly our Lord's Will 
that we should cheerfully endure all crosses 
which may come to us, either from om: own 
evil doings, or from those of others, for us to 
say — as many say as an excuse for their im- 
patience — that God wills not, nay, hates evil 
deeds, is but a vain pretext for hiding our own 
fault, and for refusing the cross which we well 
know He intended us to bear. 

Indeed, I will go further and say, that, taking 
all things into consideration, our Lord is more 
pleased with our endurance of those sufferings 
which come to us from the misdeeds of others^ 
especially from those who are under an obligation 
to us, than with our endurance of those trials 
which arise from other distressing accidents. 
And this because our proud nature is more 
humbled in the former than in the latter case ; and 
also because, by cheerfully enduring them, we 
do most especially please and magnify our God, 



\ 



OF THE EXERCISE OF A SINGLE VIRTUE I3I 

working together with Him in that which renders 
His unspeakable Goodness and Almightiness 
most conspicuous, namely, His way of drawing 
out of the deadly poison of malice and wicked- 
ness the sweet and precious fruit of virtue and 
goodness. 

Know, then, beloved, that when the Lord 
has discovered in us the desire to yield our- 
selves up in earnest, and to strive as we ought for 
so great a prize, He at once prepares for us a cup 
of the sharpest temptations and hardest trials, 
that we may drink it when He wills ; and we, 
as we acknowledge His love and our own profit, 
should receive it cheerfully and blindly, and 
drink it; trustingly and unhesitatingly to the very 
dregs, for it is a medicine, mixed by an unerring 
Hand, and composed of ingredients which are 
as profitable to the soul as they are bitter in 
themselves. 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

J^oiD to atjai( mirisidbc^ of tT)eDarfou0 i3Dcca0fon0 to^icli 
pre0ent tfjcm^elDe^ for t\z <£]cercijie of a jifttgle 
(Hirtue. 

IT has been already seen, that it is better to 
exercise ourselves in a single virtue at a 
time than in many at once ; and that we should 




132 OF THE EXERCISE OF A SINGLE VIRTUE 

use the opportunities we meet with to this end, 
however various. Now learn how you may 
effect this with tolerable facility. 

It may happen that in the very same day, 
and perhaps in the same hour, that we are 
blamed for some good action, or found fault 
with for some other cause ; we may be harshly 
denied some favour we have asked for, or some 
trifling request ; we may be accused of some- 
thing we have not done, or be called upon to 
endure some bodily pain, or some petty annoy- 
ance (such as a dish badly cooked) ; or we may 
have to bear some real and heavy trial, such as 
this miserable life is full of. 

In this variety of occurrences, and in any 
other like events, we may perform various acts 
of virtue, yet, if we would keep to our rule, 
we must continue to exercise ourselves in 
acts which belong to the virtue we have in 
hand. 

J'or example ; if it is patience we are endea- 
vouring to cultivate, when these opportunities 
present themselves, we must meet them with a 
willing and light heart. 

If it is humility, we must in all our troubles 
acknowledge that we deserve them. 

If it is obedience, we must promptly submit 
ourselves to the Almighty Hand of God, and for 
His pleasure (since He has so willed it) to all 



T 



\ 



rational and even senseless creatures that may 
have occasioned us annoyances. 

If it is poverty, we shall be quite ready to be 
stripped of all the consolations of this world, 
great and small. 

If it is charity, we shall perform acts of love 
towards our neighbour, through whose instru- 
mentality we may thus progress ; and towards our 
Lord God, as the First and Loving Cause, from 
Whom our discomforts proceed, or by Whom 
they are permitted to arise, for our discipline 
and spiritual improvement. 

What has been said of the various accidents 
which may every day happen is equally true of a 
trial of long continuance, such as sickness, or 
other like affliction ; we may yet go on making 
acts of the virtue, in which we are at the time 
exercising ourselves. 



CHAPTER XL. 

SDf ttje tengtt) of time to "bt gilien to t^e C]ccrct0e of 
fact) partfcutar 2Iirttie, antj of tl^e matlfe0 of ^piri« 
tiiat Slutjanccmettt. 

IT is not for me to determine the length of time 
to be bestowed upon acquiring each virtue. 
In this we must be guided by the state and 
needs of each person, by the progress they are 




7 



134 OF SPIRITUAL ADVA NCEMENT 

making in the spiritual life, and by the direction 
of their guide. 

But if we set to work in earnest, in the way 
we have prescribed, there can be no doubt but 
that, in a few weeks, we shall have made con- 
siderable progress. 

It is a sign of advancement in the spiritual 
life, if notwithstanding dryness of spirit, darkness, 
anguish of soul, and desolation, we yet firmly per- 
severe in our exercises of virtue. 

Another clear indication of growth, is to be 
found in the degree of resistance made by our sen- 
sual nature to the performance of acts of virtue ; 
for the weaker the resistance, the greater the 
progress. When, therefore, we no longer feel 
contradiction and rebellion in our lower and 
sensual nature, and especially in sudden and 
unexpected assaults, we may look upon this as 
a sign that the virtue we are seeking has been 
acquired. 

And the greater the alacrity and brightness 
of spirit with which these acts are done, the 
greater advantage may we hope to derive from 
their exercise. 

Beware, however, not to assume as a certainty 
that we have formed a virtue, or gained a lasting 
victory over a passion, even though for a long 
time, and after many battles, we may have 
ceased to feel its motions within us. For such 



\ 



OF SPIRITUAL ADVANCEMENT 1 35 

a result may be brought about by the artifices 
and workings of Satan, and of our own deceitful 
nature; for through our lurking pride we take that 
for virtue which is really vice. Besides, if we 
consider the standard of perfection to which 
God calls us, however great our progress may 
have been in the way of holiness, we shall hardly 
persuade ourselves that we have even crossed 
its threshold. 

As a young soldier, then, and, as it were, a 
new-born babe in the conflict, return continually 
to your earliest exercises, as though as yet you 
had done nothing. 

And remember, beloved, that it is much better 
to seek to advance in virtues, than to examine 
too nicely what progress you have made; for 
the Lord God, the true and only Searcher of 
our hearts, gives this knowledge to some and 
not to others, according as He sees that it will 
lead to humility or to pride ; and, like a loving 
Father, He removes a danger from one, whilst to 
another He vouchsafes an opportunity of growing 
in the virtue. 

Therefore, though the soul does not perceive 
the progress which has been made, yet still con- 
tinue these exercises, for when the Lord wills 
our progress shall be revealed to us for our 
greater good. 



// 



^ 



7 



136 OF GROWING IN HOLINESS 



CHAPTER XLI. 

tSTl^at toe mu0t not pfefn u t\t toi^fe to be n'B of tl^e 
tJTriar^ tol^icTj toe are fiearing patientlp j anB Iboto 
toe 0T)outB rule aH our T>tmt^ 00 a0 to groto in 
!^onne0$. 

WHEN you find yourself in some painful 
position, and bearing it patiently, be 
careful lest the Devil, or the suggestions of self- 
love, lead you to desire to be free from it ; for 
by this two great evils might happen to you. 

One is, that if the wish did not altogether 
destroy the virtue of patience, it would at least 
gradually dispose you to impatience. 

The other, that your patience would become 
defective, and would be rewarded by God only 
according to the length of time it was exercised ; 
whereas, if you had not desired the removal of 
the suffering, but had submitted unreservedly 
to the Divine Will, your sufferings would have 
been accepted by God as equivalent to a service 
of long endurance, though they had lasted but 
an hour, or even less. 

Make this your universal rule in this and in 
all things, to keep your desires so far withdrawn 
from every other object, that they may tend 
simply and purely to their true and only end, — 



\ 



the Will of God. For thus will they be holy and 
just, and you — whatever may happen in a con- 
trary manner — will remain calm and contented ; 
for, as nothing can take place except it be ap- 
pointed by the Supreme Will, if you will the 
same, you will come at all times both to will 
and to have all that happens and all that you 
desire. 

This cannot be understood of your own sins 
or of those of others, for these God wills not, 
but it does apply to every chastisement which 
arises from these or other causes, though it be 
so severe and searching as to reach to the bottom 
of the heart, and to wither the very roots of the 
natural life ; for this is the cross with which God 
is sometimes pleased to favour His nearest and 
dearest friends. 

And what I say of the endurance which we 
must exercise on all occasions, must be under- 
stood also of those remains of any trouble which 
the Lord wills us to bear, even after we have 
used all lawful means to be freed from it. 

And even in using these means we should be 
guided by the Providence and Will of God, 
Who has ordained them, that we might use them 
according to His Will, and not to please our- 
selves. Neither should we desire nor love relief 
from trials, beyond that limit which His service 
requires and His Will appoints. 



v-^ 



^ 



138 OF RESISTING THE DEVIL 



CHAPTER XLII. 

!^oiD to resijst t\t Detiil ioTjen fjc trtesi tt^ engnarc u0 
Ijp an inni^creet ^eaf. 

WHEN the Devil, crafty as he is, observes 
that we are walking straight forward 
in the path of holiness with lively and well- 
rfegulated desires, and that he cannot draw us 
aside by open allurements, he transforms himself 
into an angel of light, and by friendly sugges- 
tions, quotations from Scripture, and examples 
of the Saints, importunately urges us to aspire 
indiscreetly to the height of perfection, that he 
may presently cause us to fall headlong from it. 
With this in view he excites us to chastise the 
body with great harshness, with scourges, fasts, 
hair-cloths, and other similar mortifications, that 
he may either tempt us to pride, by thinking we 
are doing great things (as is especially the case 
with women), or that he may undermine our 
health, and so unfit us for doing good works, or 
else that spiritual exercises may become irksome 
and distasteful to us through pain and over- 
fatigue ; and thus by degrees we grow lukewarm 
in the way of godliness, and at last rush with 
greater avidity than before to the delights and 
pleasures of the world. 



1 



OF RESISTING THE DEVIL 



139 



7 



With many this has been the case. They, 
having been led on by a presumptuous spirit, 
and by the impulses of an indiscreet zeal, have, 
in their excessive outward austerities, gone 
beyond the measure of their own strength, and 
so have perished in their own inventions, and 
have become the sport of malicious fieiids. 
This would never have happened if they had 
laid to heart what we have been saying and 
considering, which is, that painful acts of this 
sort, however praiseworthy and profitable to 
those whose bodily strength and lowliness of 
spirit are equal to them, must yet ever be 
limited by the requirements of each man's con- 
stitution and temperament. 

And if you cannot imitate the Saints in their 
austerities, you may find other features in their 
character which you can copy, by strong and 
effectual desires and fervent prayers, aspiring after 
the most glorious crowns of Christ's true soldiers ; 
by despising, as they did, the whole world, and 
themselves also; by giving themselves up to 
silence and solitude ; by humility and gentleness 
towards all men ; by patience under wrongs, and 
kindness to those who treated them ill; by watch- 
fulness against even the smallest fault, for this is 
more pleasing to God than all bodily austerities. 
I counsel you, then, to be sparing in the use of 
such, so as to be able, if needs be, to increase your 



V 



mortification, rather than to run the risk of having 



i 



to give them up altogether because of excesses, j 



I give you this advice, being persuaded that you 
are not likely to fall into the error of some, who, 
though they pass for spiritual persons in the 
world, yet are they deluded and led astray by 
their deceitful nature into over-carefulness about 
the preservation of their bodily health. So 
jealous and anxious over it are they, that for the 
most trifling matter they live in fear and dread 
of losing it. There is nothing they think about 
more, or are more ready to speak of, than the 
management of their bodily health. Hence they 
are also planning how to procure food suited 
rather to their taste than to their digestion, which 
latter has often been impaired by their indul- 
gence in delicacies. And, although this is done 
under the pretext of being able to serve God 
better, it is but a vain attempt to unite two 
deadly foes, the spirit and the flesh, — an attempt 
which results in benefiting neither and in injur- 
ing both, for this same over-carefulness impairs the 
health of the one and the devotion of the other. 
A certain degree of liberty in these matters is 
safer and more profitable as a rule ; yet it must 
be accompanied by the discretion of which I 
have been speaking, and have regard to the 
differences of constitution and spiritual state, 
which cannot be subjected to an uniform rule. 



I 



\ 



OF EVIL INC UNA TIONS 1 4 1 

Further than this, I would add, that not only 
in outward things, but also in the pursuit of 
inward holiness, we should proceed with modera- 
tion, as has been shown above, as to the gradual 
attainment of virtues. 



CHAPTER XLIII. 

S)f t^t Potocr of our ^\^'\\ 3IncTinatioit0, attu of i\t 
CCTap t^e OetiU tempt0 u0 to form x^$\ 3fuug« 
ment0 of our iQciglbtout, anu l&oto to re^fjsit l^im. 

FROM the above-named vice of self-esteem 
and self-conceit arises another most hurt- 
ful, namely, the practice of rashly judging our 
neighbour, which leads us to disparage, despise, 
and lower him. As this fault springs from pride 
and evil inclination, so is it thereby willingly 
cherished and fomented ; and our pride increases 
as the fault increases, and insensibly flatters and 
deceives us. For the more we presume to exalt 
ourselves, so much the more do we in our 
opinion depreciate others, and imagine that we 
are free from those imperfections which we make 
ourselves believe we see in them. 

And the crafty Devil, who sees this most evil 
disposition in us, stands ever on the watch to 
open our eyes and make us quick-sighted to 




142 OF EVIL INCLINATIONS 

detect, examine, and exaggerate the deficiencies 
of oth^s. 

The careless do not believe or imagine how 
busy he is in impressing on our minds the little 
failings of this or that person, when he cannot 
bring before us great faults. 

Seeing, then, that he is so intent on our 
destruction, let us be watchful, lest we fall into 
his snares. And as soon as he sets before you 
any failing of your neighbour, turn away from 
the thought at once; and if you still feel tempted 
to criticise, do not yield to the desire. Remem- 
ber that the right to judge another is not yours ; 
and that even if it had been intrusted to you, 
you would be incapable of exercising it with 
integrity, as you are encompassed by a thousand 
passions, and but too prone to think evil of 
another without just cause. 

The most effectual remedy against this temp- 
tation is, I would remind you, the attentive 
consideration of your own heart ; for you will 
hourly make fresh discoveries of the amount of 
work you have to do in yourself, and for yourself, 
which will leave you neither the leisure nor the 
inclination to busy yourself about the conduct of 
others. 

Moreover, by the faithful performance of this 
exercise of self-inspection, you will more and 
more purge your inward eye of those bad hu- 



7 



OF EVIL INCLINA TIONS 1 43 

mours which foster this pestilent vice of rash 
judgment. 

Know this, too, that when uncharitably you 
think you see an evil in your brother, some root 
of the same evil is in your own heart, which, in 
proportion as it is ill-disposed, readily sees in 
another that which is already in itself. 

When, therefore, we are inclined to judge 
others for some fault, let us inwardly be indig- 
nant with ourselves as guilty of the same, and 
say in our heart, " How dare I, wretched being, 
buried in this very fault myself, and in far more 
grievous ones, lift up my head to see and judge 
the faults of others ?" 

And thus the weapons which, when aimed at 
others, would have wounded you yourself, being 
used against yourself, bring healing to your 
wounds. 

• But if you cannot disguise the fact that your 
brother has committed a fault, yet take a corn- 
passionate view of it, and believe that he has 
hidden virtues, to guard which the Lord has 
permitted him to fall; or, that this failing is 
allowed to cling to him for a time, that he may 
become more vile in his own sight; or that, being 
despised by others, he may learn to humble him- 
self, and thus become more pleasing to God, and 
so his gain at last may become greater than his 
loss. 



/ 



\ 



144 OF PRAYER 



If again the sin be not only unmistakeable, 
but grievous, and obstinately persisted in, turn 
your thoughts to the secret and awful judgments 
of God ; and see how many, once most wicked, 
attained at last to an eminent degree of sanctity, 
whilst, on the other hand, many who seemed to 
have reached sublime heights of perfection, have 
fallen headlong into misery. 

Therefore ever fear and tremble for yourself 
more than for any other. 

And be assured, that every good and kindly 
feeling towards your neighbour is the work of 
the Holy Spirit ; and that all disparagement, 
rash judgment, and bitterness against him, owe 
their origin to the evil that is in ourselves and to 
the suggestions of the Devil. 

If, then, the failings of another have made an 
impression on you, rest not, nor sleep, until you 
have, to the utmost of your power, effaced it from 
your heart. 



CHAPTER XLIV. 

SDf Prapcr. 

IF distrust of self, trust in God, and spiritual 
exercises, are so needful as they have been 
shown to be in this combat, needful above all is 



OF PRAYER 145 



prayer (the fourth weapon, mentioned in the 
beginning of this book), by means of which we 
may obtain from our Lord, not only the things 
already named, but all other good things. 

For prayer is the means by which we obtain 
all the graces which rain down upon us from the 
Divine Fountain of Goodness and Love. 

By prayer, if you use it aright, you will put 
a sword into the Hand of God, with which He 
will fight and conquer for you; and to use it 
aright, you must have formed, or be striving to 
form, the following habits. 

First, you must cultivate an earnest desire to 
serve His Divine Majesty in all things, and in 
the way which is most pleasing to Him. In order 
to kindle this desire, consider diligently how 
worthy beyond expression God is, to be served 
and honoured, because of His wondrous excel- 
lences. His Goodness, Majesty, Wisdom, Beauty, 
and other infinite Perfections. 

Consider, too, how to serve you He laboured 
and suffered for three and thirty years, binding 
and healing the putrefying sores, poisoned with 
the venom of sin, not with oil and wine and 
bandages, but with the precious Stream which 
flowed from His most Sacred Veins, and with 
His most pure Flesh, torn with scourges, thorns, 
and nails. 

Think, moreover, of the great advantage of this 



\ 



146 OF PRAYER 



service ; for by it we gain the mastery over self, 
superiority over Satan, and become the sons of 
God. 

Secondly, you must have a lively faith and 
trust in God, that He will give you all things 
which you need for His service, and for your 
own good. 

This holy confidence is a vessel into which 
Divine Mercy pours the treasures of His grace ; 
and the larger and more capacious it is, the more 
richly laden will our prayers return into our 
bosom. For how shall the Unchanging and 
Almighty God fail to impart to us His gifts, when 
He Himself has commanded us to ask for them, 
and has also promised us His Holy Spirit, if we 
ask for it with faith and perseverance ? 

Thirdly, you must, when you draw nigh in 
prayer, seek the accomplishment of the Divine 
Will, and not of your own, both by the act of 
prayer itself and by that you desire to obtain ; 
that is, pray, as an act of obedience to the 
Divine Will, and desire to be heard in so far 
only as God wills. In short, your attention 
should be to unite your will to God's, not to 
bend His to yours. 

And the reason for this is, that your own will, 
being tainted and corrupted by self-love, very 
often errs, and knows not what it asks ; but the 
Divine Will, always united to inefifable Goodness, 



\ 



OF PRAYER 147 



7 



can never err. Therefore the Will of God ought 
to be the rule and ruler of all other wills ; and 
deserves and desires to be followed and obeyed 
by all. 

Ask, therefore, such things as you know are 
conformable to the Divine Will, and if you stand 
in doubt whether any thing you desire is so or 
not, ask to obtain it only on the condition of its 
accordance with the Will of God. 

And if we are sure that the things we ask are 
agreeable to Him, such as virtues, ask for them 
rather in order to serve and please Him, than 
for any other motive or end, however spiritual. 

Fourthly, if we desire that our prayers should 
be answered, we must previously adorn ourselves 
with actions corresponding to our petitions, and, 
after we have prayed, labour more earnestly to 
render ourselves fit to receive the grace and 
virtue we have sought 

For prayer and self-discipline must always go 
together, and the one revolves round the other ; 
since he who prays for a virtue and makes no 
effort to practise it, would be rather a tempter 
of God than any thing else. 

Fifthly, before you pray for any thing, make 
an act of thanksgiving for previous mercies, in 
this or some similar form of words : — 

" O Lord, Who of Thy Goodness hast created 
and redeemed me, and Who, times without 



148 OF PRAYER 



T 



number, and when I knew not, hast rescued 
me out of the hands of my enemies ; help me 
now, and, forgetting all my past rebellion and 
ingratitude, deny me not my request." 

And if you are asking for a particular virtue, 
and in the midst of the very act of prayer 
you are tempted by the contrary vice, forget 
not to thank God for giving you such an 
opportunity of practising the virtue you are 
praying for, and regard it as a special favour on 
His part 

Sixthly, as the force and efficacy of prayer 
in bending God to our desires are due to the 
Bounty and Goodness of His own Nature, to 
the merits of the Life and Passion of His Only- 
begotten Son, and to His gracious promise to 
hear us, we should always conclude our prayer 
with one or more of the following sentences : — 

" Of Thy great Mercy, O Lord, grant me this 
grace." "May the merits of Thy Son obtain 
for me that which I ask of Thee." " My God, 
be mindful of Thy promises, and hear my 
prayer." 

And at other times we may also ask for graces 
through the prayers of the Blessed Virgin and 
other Saints, who have great power before God, 
in that He is pleased to honour them now, who 
honoured His Divine Majesty during their 
sojourn on earth. 



\ 



OF PRAYER 149 



Seventhly, we must persevere in prayer, for 
humble perseverance triumphs over the Invincible 
One. If the steadfastness and importunity of 
the widow in the Gospel inclined to her request 
the judge laden with all iniquity, how should 
such perseverance fail to move the heart of God, 
and incline Him to grant our petitions, Who is 
the Fountain of all Goodness? 

And if the Lord should defer answering your 
prayer, or even seem to reject it, only pray on 
still, and keep your confidence in His help firm 
and unshaken ; for He possesses, beyond mea- 
sure, all that is needed to make graces in others. 

Therefore, unless there is some impediment 
on our part, we shall infallibly obtain what we 
ask, or something else more expedient for us, 
or it may be both together. 

And the more He seems to repel you, the 
lower should you humble yourself in your own 
sight, and reflect upon your own unworthiness ; 
yet, keeping your gaze steadfastly fixed on the 
Mercy of God, increase more and more your 
confidence in Him, which if you keep lively and 
unshaken, the more it is assailed, the more pleas- 
ing will you become to your Lord. 

Give Him, then, continual thanks, confessing 
Him to be no less Good, Wise, and Loving, 
when some of your petitions are denied than 
when they are all granted. Whatever may 

1 X 



150 WHA T IS MENTAL PR A YER 

happen, let us remain steadfast and joyful, in 
humble submission to His Divine Providence. 



CHAPTER XLV. 

CCIlbat [0 C^ental draper. 

MENTAL prayer is the lifting up of our 
heart to God, accompanied with an 
actual or virtual request for something we desire. 

It is an actual request, when we clothe our 
thought or desire with unspoken words, mentally 
forming such sentences as these, or others like 
them : — " O Lord, grant me this grace, for Thy 
Name's Sake ;" or, " O Lord, I believe it is in 
accordance with Thy Will, and for Thy Glory, 
that I should ask and receive this grace from 
Thee; accomplish therefore now Thy Divine 
Will in me." 

And when you feel the assaults of your 
enemies, say thus : — " My God, haste Thou to 
help me, that I yield not to mine enemies;" or, 
" My God, my Refuge, Thou Strength of my 
heart, help me speedily, lest I fall." And con- 
tinue to pray in this way, until the struggle is 
over, manfully resisting your enemy all the 
while. 

When the heat of the conflict is past, turn to 
your Lord, and present before Him the enemy 



JVIfA T IS MENTAL PR A YER 1 5 1 

who has been attacking you, and your own frailty 
in resisting him, and say : — " See, O Lord, the 
creature of Thy bounty, which Thou hast made 
with Thy Hands, and redeemed with Thy Blood. 
Behold also Thine enemy, who strives to pluck 
it out of Thine Hand, and to devour it To 
Thee, O Lord, I fly for succour, in Thee alone 
do I trust, for Thou art Almighty and infinitely 
Good, and knowest my weakness, and my prone- 
ness to yield myself up a willing captive to 
my enemies, unless Thou help me. Help 
me, therefore, my Hope, and the Strength of my 
soul!" 

It is a virtual request, when we lift up our 
heart to God to gain some grace, showing Him 
our need without moulding our thoughts into 
words or sentences. When, for instance, I lift 
up my mind to God, and present before Him the 
consciousness of my own inability either to 
defend myself from any evil, or to perform any 
good action ; and burning in His presence with 
the desire to serve Him, I humbly and faithfully 
await His help, and admire and intently gaze 
upon the Lord Himself. 

This confession of our weakness, enkindled 
with fervent desire and faith towards God, is a 
prayer which virtually asks for what I want; 
and the more convinced we are of our weakness 
when we acknowledge it, and the more ardent 



/ 




152 OF MEDITATION 

our desire, and the more vivid our faith, the 
more efficacious will our prayer be. 

There is another and more swift kind of 
virtual prayer, which consists of a mere glance 
of the mind towards God, so as to implore His 
help, which glance is, as it were, a silent remem- 
brancer, asking for the grace which we had before 
prayed for. 

We should strive to form the habit of praying 
in this way, for it is a weapon of more value and 
assistance than I can say (as experience has 
shown), and one which we may lay hold of at 
all times and on all occasions. 



CHAPTER XLVI. 

SDf (^euitation. 

IF you wish to spend some time in prayer — 
half an hour, or an hour, or more — ^you will 
do well to make a meditation on the Life and 
Passion of Jesus Christ, and in it always apply 
His actions to the particular virtue which you 
are seeking to gain. 

Thus, if you are seeking to obtain patience, 
you would select for your subject of meditation 
the Mystery of the Scourging. 

Consider, first, how after the command was 



\ 



OF MEDITA TION 1 53 

given by Pilate, our Lord was dragged with 
scoffs and cries, by wicked men, to the place 
appointed for His Scourging. 

Secondly, think how He was stripped by 
them with impatient fury of His garments, so 
that His most Pure Flesh was left naked and 
exposed. 

Thirdly, consider how His innocent Hands 
were tightly bound with hard cords, and fastened 
to the pillau:. 

Fourthly, consider how His whole Body was 
torn and gashed with blows, so that His Divine 
Blood in streams ran down to the ground. 

Fifthly, see repeated lashes fall upon the same 
place, exasperating the wounds already made. 

Whilst you dwell upon these, or similar points 
of consideration, in order to gain patience, first 
apply your senses to feel, in the highest degree 
possible, the intense agony and acute suffering 
which your dear Lord endured in every part of 
His most Sacred Body, and throughout all of it 
at once. 

Then pass to His interior Sufferings, and strive 
to enter into the meekness and patience with 
which He bore so great agonies in His most 
Holy Soul, and consider how, unsatisfied with 
these, He hungered to suffer even more excru- 
ciating sufferings for the glory of His Father and 
for our good. 



/ 



154 OF PR A YING BY MEDITA TING 

Then see Him inflamed with the fervent desire 
that you should willingly bear your affliction, and 
still turning to His Father, behold Him praying 
for you, that He would vouchsafe to give you 
grace patiently to bear your cross, both that which 
is now weighing heavily upon you, and all others 
which may be laid upon you hereafter. 

Here bend your will again and again to will 
to suffer all with a patient spirit; and then, 
turning to the Eternal Father, thank Him for 
having, out of His pure Love, sent His Only- 
begotten Son into the world to endure such 
bitter pain, and to intercede for you; then 
ask Him through the merit of the Works and 
Prayers of His Beloved Son, to grant you the 
virtue of patience. 



CHAPTER XLVII. 

0f Btiotljer (DHap of Prapfnj b^ CKap of ©etttation. 

YOU may also resort to another plan of 
praying and meditating. After you have 
attentively considered the afflictions of the 
Lord, and dwelt upon His cheerful acceptance 
of them, you may pass on from the greatness of 
His Travail and of His Patience to two other 
considerations — 



\ 



OF THE PR A VERS OF THE VIRGIN MARY 1 55 

The one, of His Merit; the other, of the 
Satisfaction and Glory which the Eternal Father 
derived from the perfect obedience of His Son 
in His Passion. 

And bringing both of these things before His 
Divine Majesty, ask through their virtue the 
grace which you desire. 

And this you may do, not only in each 
Mystery of our Lord's Passion, but in each 
separate act, whether interior or exterior, in each 
Mystery, 



CHAPTER XLVIII. 

Of a CHap of ^raping bp mean« of tfte T5te0seD 
^irg:in iJ©arp. 

BESIDES the modes of meditating already 
referred to, there is another way of medi- 
tating, which has reference to the Blessed Virgin 
Mary. First, turn your thoughts to the Eternal 
Father, next address yourself to the sweet and 
beloved Jesus, and lastly, contemplate His 
ever-blessed Mother. 

Whilst turning to God the Father, consider 
two things ; first. His delight in beholding from 
all eternity Mary, before He had drawn her out 
of nothingness; secondly, the graces and virtues 



7 



156 OF THE PRAYERS OF THE VIRGIN MARY 

she displayed, after God sent her into the 
world. 

Enter into the first point thus : — 

Begin by raising your thoughts above all 
created things ; go back into the eternity which 
preceded all creation, enter into the mind of 
God, and see what delight He took in the 
thought of the Virgin Mary ; ask Him, by that 
delight, for the grace and strength you need for 
conquering your enemies, and particularly that 
one against which you are now struggling. 

Then consider the great and singular virtues 
and actions of the most holy Mother, bring all 
and each before God, asking Him by the grace 
which He wrought in her, that He would of His 
Divine Goodness grant you what you require. 

Then turn to God the Son, and remind Him 
of the virginal womb in which He was borne for 
nine months, of the adoration which, after He 
was bom, the Blessed Virgin paid Him, recog- 
nizing Him at once as God and man, as her 
Son and her Creator ; of the compassionate gaze 
with which she contemplated Him in His 
poverty ; of the arms which embraced Him ; of 
the loving kisses with which she caressed Him ; 
of the breasts which fed Him ; of the pain and 
anguish she endured for His sake throughout 
His Life, and at His Death. By these memories 
you will bring to bear a sweet pressure upon the 



\ 



OF THE PRAYERS OF THE VIRGIN MARY 157 

Divine Son, Who is ever ready to hear your 
prayer. 

I-.astly, contemplate the most Holy Virgin 
herself, remembering how Divine Providence 
from all eternity has chosen her to be the Mother 
of the Author of grace and pity, so that, beneath 
her Blessed Son, there is no one so full of 
tenderness, no one whose prayers are so power- 
ful. Represent that which has been written of 
her, and which it is said experience has found 
by so many wonderful results, that no one ever 
faithfully asked that her prayers might be granted 
to them, and asked in vain. Recall the suffer- 
ings which her Son endured for your salvation ; 
ask that her prayers may obtain grace for you 
to profit by them, that His Passion may work 
in you the results He desired, to His glory and 
Satisfaction. 



CHAPTER XLIX. 

S)f certain Conginerationis a0 to JFaitld antJ Con- 
fidence in tl^e J9rapfr0 of tl^e Qitgin ^arp. 

IF you would have recourse to the prayers of 
the Blessed Virgin with confidence, you 
may encourage yourself by the following consi- 
derations. 

First, every one knows by experience that a 




158 OF THE PRAYERS OF THE VIRGIN MARY 

vessel which has contained musk or any other 
precious perfume, retains the odour of it after it 
has been removed ; and the longer the perfume 
has been in the vessel, the longer does the fra- 
grance linger about it, and this is more the case 
when some of the liquid itself still remains. But 
the virtue of the musk, or of any other perfume, 
is limited and finite. 

Now, if this be so, with what a glow of charity, 
with what a richness of tenderness and pity, 
must the heart of Mary have been kindled and 
filled 1 For nine months did she carry in her 
virginal womb Him Who is essentially Love, 
Mercy and Pity, and Who in an infinite manner 
possessed those attributes ; and still in her heart 
and love does He ever abide. If he who comes 
near to a great fire cannot but feel a portion of 
its heat ; much more, shall we not, as we con- 
template that fire of charity, mercy and pity 
which glowed in Mary, be conscious of some 
effluence of its rays, enkindling and elevating 
our spiritual life ; and this the more, the oftener 
we draw near, and the greater the faith and 
confidence with which we ask that her prayers 
may be granted to us. 

Secondly, no created being ever loved Jesus 
Christ so ardently as she did, nor was there ever 
any one who was so perfectly conformed to His 
Will as His most holy Mother. 



\ 



OF THE PRAYERS OF THE SAINTS 1$() 

If then the Son of God, Who gave His whole 
Life and Himself for us, to redeem us from our 
sins, has made His Mother in a way to become 
the mother of all who share His nature, that she 
beneath Himself may have our interests at heart, 
and that she may aid us with her prayers, how 
can we doubt, if this be so, but that she fulfils 
His purposes in her with regard to us ? 

Therefore we may confidently ask that her 
prayers may be vouchsafed to us in all our needs, 
for this belief is very blessed ; as she may obtain 
for us many gifts of grace and mercy. 



CHAPTER L. 

flDf a GHa^ of Cpeuitattng: anu Prating lip meanp of 
ttie Zn^tU antJ all t\^t T5leiE(iE(eB. 

THERE are two ways of dealing with the 
Saints and Angels in Heaven in order to 
obtain their assistance. 

The first is, to represent to the Eternal Father 
the praises and glory which He receives from 
the heavenly Court, and also to bring before 
Him the toils and pains which the Saints have 
suffered on earth for His love ; and by virtue 
of these to ask of His Divine Majesty all that 
we need. 



/ 








The second is, to ask for the prayers of those 
glorious spirits, who not only desire our perfec- 
tion, but also that we may be in a far higher posi- 
tion than they are ; begging that they may aid you 
against every enemy and every form of sin, and 
especially may guard you in the hour of death. 

At other times you will reflect upon the many 
and singular graces which they have received 
from their Sovereign Creator, kindling in your- 
self lively affections of love and joy for those 
precious gifts with which they are enriched, 
rejoicing as if all those gifts had been bestowed 
upon yourself 

You should carry this disinterested joy even 
to a greater pitch than this, and even, if possible, 
rejoice that they rather than yourself have been 
thus favoured, since it is God's Will ; and render, 
therefore, to Him thanks and praise. 

To practise this devotion with ease and order, 
you may divide the different orders of the Blessed 
into seven parts, according to the seven days of 
the week. 

Thus : — on Sunday, honour the nine choirs 
of the Angels ; on Monday, St. John the Baptist; 
on Tuesday, the Patriarchs and Prophets; on 
Wednesday, the Apostles; on Thursday, the 
Martjrrs ; on Friday, Bishops and other Saints > 
and on Saturday, the Virgins and other Saints. 

But omit not on any day the Blessed Virgin, 



1 \ 



OF MEDITA TION ON THE PASSION 1 6 1 

Queen of all Saints ; your guardian Angel j St 
Michael, the Archangel ; and all your patrons. 

Daily entreat the Eternal Father and His 
Beloved Son, and ask for the prayers of the 
Blessed Virgin, that St Joseph, the spouse of the 
Blessed Virgin, may also aid you, and confidently 
ask God for his special care and protection. 
Many wonderful things are told us of this glo- 
rious Saint, and of the many favours, both tem- 
poral and spiritual, which have been granted to 
those who have honoured him with pious venera- 
tion, and devoutly sought his prayers, — more 
especially to those who have wanted help in 
prayer and meditation. 

For if God has so greatly honoured other saints 
who during their life have rendered honour and 
service to Him, what esteem will He have for 
that most humble and blessed Saint, whom He 
Himself so honoured upon earth as to be sub* 
ject to him as to a father, and so obeyed and 
served him ! 



CHAPTER LI. 

flDf ©etiitatiott on tlje Pa!E(0ton of CldrijSt, toitld a 
tJieto to ejcctte Uartoujai afFectiott0. 



w 



HAT has already been said respecting 
meditation on the Lord's Passion, 




7 



l62 OF MEDITATION ON THE PASSION 

relates to that manner of praying which consists 
in seeking something from God. I am going 
now to refer to it, in order to show how we may 
in this way excite divers affections. 

I will imagine, then, that you have chosen 
the Crucifixion for your meditation. In this 
Mystery you may dwell on the following points 
among others : — 

First, consider how the furious people on 
Mount Calvary passionately stripped our Lord ; 
and how His Flesh, through the Scourging He 
endured, stuck to His clothes, and was torn off 
in pieces. 

Secondly, how the crown of thorns was taken 
off His Head, and again pressed upon It, so 
that the thorns were driven in again. 

Thirdly, how with the blows of the hammer 
and with nails, He was cruelly fastened to the 
Cross. 

Fourthly, how, when His sacred Limbs would 
not reach the places where the holes were made 
to receive the nails, those savage dogs stretched 
his Arms and Legs so violently that His dis- 
jointed Bones might be numbered. 

Fifthly, how, as the Lord bung on the hard 
wood of the Cross, the weight of His Body in 
that position increased the size of His most 
Sacred Wounds, and aggravated inexpressibly 
the pain. 



\ 



OF MEDITA TION ON THE PA SSION 1 63 

In order to excite in yourself by these and 
other considerations of the same jkind> the afFeq-i 
tion of love, strive to gain more and more deeply 
the knowledge of your Lord's Infinite Goodness, 
and Love towards you, Who for your sake willed 
to suffer such cruel torments ; for the more you 
advance in this knowledge, the more will you 
increase in love. 

This knowledge, too, of the Goodness 9Jid 
Infinite Love of your Lord, will excite in you 
contrition and regret for having so often and so 
ungratefully offended a God Who was for your 
sins in so many ways ill-treated and tortured. 

To call out hope, consider, that into this state 
of misery your mighty Lord descended, that He 
might destroy sin, and rescue you from the snares 
of the devil, and from the faults which you have 
committed; that He might reconcile you to His 
Eternal Father, and give you boldness to draw 
near to Him in every need. 

To call out joy, pass from the consideration 
of the Passion to the thought of its results ; you 
will see how this Passion has the power of 
purifying the whole world from sin, and of satis- 
fying Divine Justice ; how it has confounded the 
Prince of darkness, vanquished death, and filled 
again the void places in the angelic ranks. 

Joy will be heightened by the Consideratioo 
of the joy of the Most Holy Trinity, Ofthe Blessed 



// 



^ 



7 



1 64 OF MEDITA TION ON THE PASSION 

Virgin, of the Church Militant and Triumphant, 
in these results. 

To excite in yourself a hatred for your own 
sins, bring the points of meditation to bear upon 
yourself, by regarding the Passion of the Saviour 
as endured for no other end than to inspire you 
with hatred for your evil inclinations, and 
especially for the one which most of all has do- 
minion over you, and which is most displeasing 
to the Divine Goodness. 

To move you to wonder, consider what greater 
marvel could there be than to behold the 
Creator of the universe, Who imparts life to all, 
persecuted to death by His own creatures :'to 
see Supreme Majesty trampled upon and de- 
spised; to behold Justice condemned; to see 
Divine Beaut>' spit upon ; the Love of the Hea- 
venly Father hated ; the inner and unapproach- 
able Light brought under the power of darkness ; 
Essential Blessedness and Glory reckoned as the 
dishonour and disgrace of the human race, and 
overwhelmed in abject misery. 

To stir in yourself the feeling of compassion 
for your Suffering Lord, besides meditating on 
the pains of His Body, strive to enter into those 
incomparably greater sufferings which He en- 
dured in His Soul. For if you are capable of being 
touched by the former, it will be wonderful if your 
heart is not broken by the thought of the latter. 



\ 



OF MED IT A TION ON THE PASSION 165 

The'SouI of Christ beheld the Divinity, as It 
now beholds It in Heaven ; He knew It, then, 
to be infinitely worthy of all honour and worship, 
and through the unspeakable Love with which 
this knowledge inspired Him for It, He burnt 
with the desire that all creatures should devote 
themselves with all their powers to the Divine 
Majesty. 

To see the Divine Essence, then, so strangely 
outraged and despised by the innumerable 
faults and abominable sins of the world, pierced 
Him through and through with darts of sorrow, 
which tortured Him in proportion to the great- 
ness of His Love^ and the intensity of His desire 
that all men should honour and obey so exalted 
a Majesty. 

As we cannot measure the greatness of this 
love and desire, even so can we not estimate how 
bitter and grievous was the inward sorrow of our 
Crucified Lord on that account. 

His love for all creatures, a love unspeakable, 
was another ground of sorrow ; in proportion to 
His love for them, did He grieve intensely for 
all their sins, which separated them from Him. 
He grieved for every mortal sin which had 
been, or which ever should be, committed by 
all men who had lived, or hereafter should 
live, upon the earth ; for every mortal sin sepa- 
rates the soul of the sinner from the Soul 



7 



^ 



f 



1 66 OF MEDITA TION ON THE PASSTOIT 

of tbe Lord, to which by charity it was 
united. 

, Such a separation is far more painful than dis- 
memberment of the body ; inasmuch as the soul, 
being altogether spiritual, and of a nature more 
noble and perfect than the body, is therefore 
more capable of suffering. 

Yet of all the sorrows which our Lord endured 
for His creatures, the most bitter was that which 
He felt for the sins of the damned, who, as they 
could not again be united to Him, would have 
to suffer torments eternal and inconceivable. 
- And if the soul, already touched with the 
view of these sufferings of her Beloved Jesus, 
would penetrate more deeply into them, it would 
be found that there was ample cause for com- 
passion, in the heavy grief He endured, not only 
for sins actually committed, but also for all 
possible forms of sins ; for doubtless it is to His 
Passion we are indebted both for the pardon of 
the former, and for preservation from the latter, 
both having been purchased for us by His 
precious Sufferings. 

Nor will other considerations be wanting, 
beloved, to move you to sympathize with the 
Crucified ; for there never was a grief, and never 
will be one, endured by any reasonable being, 
which He Himself has not tasted. Injuries, 
reproaches, temptations, pains, mortifications. 



\ 



and every grief and trouble which the human 
race can know, pierced more keenly the Soul of 
Christ than the souls of those who actually suffer 
them. 

For every separate suffering, great or small, of 
body or of mind, even to a slight headache or a 
prick of a needle, was clearly seen by our most 
Pitiful Lord, who of His boundless love was 
pleased to compassionate them and to engrave 
them on His Heart. 

But who .can express what He felt at the sight 
of the sorrows of His most holy Mother ? For 
in every respect and in every way in which the 
Lord sorrowed and suffered, did the Holy Virgin 
sorrow and suffer, not with equal intensity, but 
most bitterly nevertheless. 

And these her sorrows opened anew the 
inward wounds of her Blessed Son. These, like 
so many fiery darts of love, pierced His most 
loving Heart, which by reason of all the tor- 
ments which have been mentioned, and of 
others unknown — ^yet infinite in number — which 
He endured, may be well described in the words 
of a devout soul, who in holy simplicity was 
wont to call it "a loving hell of voluntary 
sufferings." 

Consider then, beloved, the cause of all this 
anguish, borne by our Crucified Redeemer and 
Lord, and you will find that it is nothing else 



7 



ir 



1 68 OF MEDJTA TION ON THE CR UCIFIXION 

but sin; therefore the genuine and principal way 
of showing the sympaithy and gratitude which 
He demands of us, and which we are undoubtedly 
bound to render to Him, is to be sorry for our 
past sins purely from love to Him ; to hate sin 
with a hatred beyond all other hatred, and to 
fight manfully against all His enemies and our 
own evil inclinations ; that thus, putting off the 
old man with his deeds, we may be clothed with 
the new, and our souls may be adorned with 
the virtues of the Christian character. 



CHAPTER LII. 

2)f tl^c '^tJtantagefi tolbtc!) map lie Den'tcn from 
^etJitation on tTjc QLrucifijcfon of our iLortJ, anu 
of t\z 3lmitaHon of ^\^ Qirtuesi. 

AMONG the many benefits which may be ob- 
tained by holy meditation, the first is, not 
only sorrow for past sin, but also regret for the 
disorderly passions which are still alive within 
you, and which nailed your Lord to the Cross. 

The second is, to seek pardon of your sins, 
and the grace of a perfect hatred of yourself, 
that you may never more offend Him; but, 
in return for all His sufferings for you, love and 
serve Him with all your heart, which is simply 
impossible, without a holy hatred of self. 



f 



T 



OF MEDITA TION ON THE CRUCIFIXION 169I 

The third is, the resolve to attack and uproot 
all your evil propensities, however trifling they 
may appear. 

The fourth is, the effort to imitate with all 
your might the virtues of the Saviour, Who 
suffered not only to redeem us and make satis- 
faction for our sins, but also to leave us an 
example that we should follow His holy steps. 

Here I will suggest a plan of meditation 
which may serve for this purpose. 

Suppose, for example, you are seeking to form 
patience; in imitating Christ your Lord, take 
the following points. 

First, consider how the Soul of Christ in the 
Passion acted towards God. 

Secondly, how God acted towards the Soul 
of Christ. 

Thirdly, how the Soul of Christ acted towards 
Itself, and towards His most holy Body. 

Fourthly, how Christ acted towards us. 

Fifthly, how we should act towards Christ. 

First, consider how the Soul of Christ, gazing 
intently upon God, marvelled to behold that in- 
finite, incomprehensible Greatness, — in compari- 
son with which all created things are as a mere 
nothing — treated with the greatest indignity on 
earth (yet still abiding changeless in Its Glory), 
and this for man, from whom It hjis received 
no return but that of unfaithfulness and insult ; 



V 



f 



17 O OP" MEDITA TION ON THE CR UCIFIXION 

consider how His Soul adored God, gave Him 
thjanks, and offered Itself wholly to Him. 

Secondly, see how God Himself acted to- 
wards the Soul of Christ ; how He willed and 
moved It to endure for our sake buffetings, 
spittings, blasphemies, scourgings, thorns, and 
at last the Cross, revealing to It all the satisfac- 
tion! which He felt in seeing It laden with every 
kind of affliction and ignominy. 

Thirdly, pass to the consideration of the Soul 
of Christ in reference to Itself. Think how His 
understanding, which is all Light, perceived how 
great this good pleasure of God was in seeing 
Him suffer ; and how with Its affection, which 
is all Fire, It loved His Divine Majesty with 
unbounded love, because of His infinite Ex- 
cellence and Its infinite indebtedness to Him. 
Think also how, being thus called by Him to 
suffer for our sake and for our example, His will 
contentedly and joyfully accepted and obeyed 
with readiness the Divine appointment And 
who can penetrate the deep longings of that 
most pure and loving Soul thus to suffer? It 
dwelt, as it were, in a labyrinth of sorrows, ever 
seeking new modes of suffering, and never (as 
It would) satisfying the desire. It gave Itself 
freely and wholly, and Its most innocent Flesh, 
as a prey to wicked men and infernal spirits, to 
be dealt with as they pleased. 



OF MEDITA TION ON THE CRUCIFIXION 1 7 1 

Fourthly, then contemplate your Saviour, as 
He turns His pitying Eyes on you, and says, 
" Behold, My child, whither your immoderate 
desires have carried Me, because you would not 
do a little violence to yourself. Behold how 
much, and how gladly, have I suffered for love 
of you, and to set you an example of true 
patience. By all My sorrows, I beseech you, 
beloved child, to bear this cross willingly, and 
every other you may yet have to bear according 
to My good pleasure; surrendering yourself into 
the hands of all your persecutors, whom I may 
permit to molest you, however vile they may be, 
and fierce against your reputation or your body. 
Oh ! didst thou but know the comfort of acting 
thus! These Wounds bear testimony to this 
truth, which I was pleased to receive as costly 
gems, so that I might adorn with precious 
virtues that poor soul of thine — dear to Me 
beyond thy conception. And if on this account 
I am brought to such an extremity, wilt thou, 
beloved spouse, refuse to suffer a little in order 
to satisfy My Heart, and allay the anguish of 
those Wounds which thy impatience has in- 
flicted, which grieves Me far more bitterly than 
the Wounds themselves ?" 

Fifthly, next consider Who it is that thus 
holds converse with you, and you will see that 
it is Christ Himself, the King of Glory, Very 



/ 




God and Very Man. Consider the greatness 
of His sufferings and His ignominy, which would 
have exceeded the deserts of the lowest criminal 
in the worid. Behold your Lord, not only 
preserving calmness, and marvellously patient, 
but rejoicing as at His nuptials ; and as a little 
water sprinkled on a fire serves but to quicken 
the flame, so with the increase of His agonies, 
which to His overflowing Love seemed little, 
did His joy increase, and His eager desire to 
suffer still more. Bear in mind, too, that your 
most merciful Lord did and suffered all this, not 
from necessity nor for any advantage to Himself, 
biit (as He has told you) from the motive of 
love for you, and in order that you might have 
His example to help you in gaining the virtue 
of patience. Endeavour, then, to acquire a 
perfect knowledge of what He desires of you, 
and of the delight He takes in seeing you 
exercise yourself in this virtue. Make acts of 
ardent desire to bear, not only without com- 
plaint, but even with joy, your present cross 
and all others which may be your lot, even if 
they are heavier, that you may become more 
like your God, and give Him greater comfort. 
Picture to yourself the shame and bitterness 
He endured for your sake, and His stedfastness 
and patience; and then, avow to your shame 
that your patience is hardly to be called a 



// 



\ 



OF MEpiTA TION ON THE CR UCIFIXION 1 7 3 

shadow of His, and that your sorrows and 
humiliation are imaginary. And fear and 
tremble, lest for a moment the slightest feeling 
of reluctance to suffer for love of your Lord be 
permitted to find the least resting-place in your 
heart 

This Crucified Lord, beloved, is the book 
which I put into your hands, and by reading It 
you may learn the true form of every virtue. 

It is the Book of Life, which not only by 
means of words enlightens the understanding, 
but also by Its living Example enkindles the 
will. 

The world is full of books; and yet, were 
they all put together, they could not teach so 
perfectly how to gain all virtues, as does the 
contemplation of a Crucified God. 

There are, however, some who spend whole 
hours in weeping over our Lord's Passion, and 
meditating on His patience; and yet, when 
troubles arise, they manifest as much impatience, 
as if in prayer they had learnt quite another 
lesson. 

Such persons are like those soldiers, who in 
theiftt tents, before battle, are full of heroism, 
but when the fight really begins, cast away their 
arms and take to flight. Can any thing be more 
sad and foolish, than to contemplate as in a 
mirror the Virtues of the Lord, to be enamoured 



\ 



174 " OF THE EUCHARIST 

of taero, and to admire them, and then, whea 
an opportunity offers itself of exercising them, 
entirely to forget and neglect them ? 



CHAPTER LIII. 

®f tl^e mo0t J^oTp Sacrament pf tl)e (Sucl^arigt, 

THUS far, beloved, I have provided you 
with four weapons, which are necessary for 
yoli in order to overcome your enemies ; and I 
have also given you directions how to manage 
them effectively. 

There yet remains another, of which I ought 
to treat, namely, the most holy Sacrament of the 
Eucharist. 

And inasmuch as this Sacrament is above all 
others, so this fifth weapon surpasses all the 
rest. 

The four of which I have spoken draw their 
virtue from the Merits and grace purchased for 
us by the Blood of Christ, but this weapon is 
itself the very Flesh and Blood together with 
the Soul and Divinity of Christ. 

With regard to the four first weapons, we 
fight against our enemies in . the strength of 
Christ, but in this fifth one, we fight against 
them with Christ Himself; and Christ Himself 



7 



OF THE EUCHARIST 



175 



fights against them with us. For whoso eats 
the Flesh of Christ and drinks His Blood, dwells 
in Christ, and Christ in him. 

This weapon, the most holy Sacrament, may 
be taken in two ways, namely, sacramentally 
and spiritually : in the former, it may be daily; in 
the latter, every hour and every moment. You 
must not then neglect to receive It very often 
in the second way, and always when you are 
permitted in the first. 



CHAPTER LIV. 

©r t\t (DHap Ujc oug:T)t to Eeceitie tlje mo0t l!?oIp 
Sacrament of t\z €ud)at:i0t. 



/ 



THERE are many ends which we may 
propose to ourselves in approaching this 
most divine Sacrament, to attain which we have 
several things to do at three different times: 
namely, before Communion, when Communicat- 
ing, and after Communion. 

Whatever end we have in view in communi- 
cating, we must cleanse and purify our soul, in 
the sacrament of Repentance, if defiled with the 
guilt of mortal sin. After this we must offer 
ourselves with our whole heart, and our whole 
soul, and our whole strength, and our whole 



\ 



J 



176 OF THE EUCHARIST 

powers, without reserve, to Jesus Christ and to 
His good pleasure, since in this most holy 
Sacrament He gives us His Blood and His 
Flesh, with His Soul, His Divinity, and His 
Merits. And, with the consciousness that our 
gift is so narrow, nay nothing, when compared 
with His, we should desire to possess, and to 
present to His Divine Majesty, all that has been, 
or ever will be, offered and given to Him by all 
creatures, on earth and in Heaven. 

If your intention in communicating be to 
obtain some victory over your enemies and 
His, and to destroy them, begin, in this case, 
on the eve of your Communion, or before, to 
meditate on the desire of the Son of God to 
enter into your heart, and to unite Himself to 
you, and to help you to overcome your evil 
passions. 

This desire is so intense and so boundless 
in Christ, that a created intellect is unable to 
comprehend it. 

But that you may in some measure approach 
a just idea of it, there are two things which 
must be impressed on your mind. One is the 
unspeakable pleasure which God in His Good- 
ness takes in dwelling with us ; for He calls it 
His delight. 

The other. His infinite hatred of sin, both 
as a bar and hindrance to His union with us, 



\ 



OF THE EUCHARIST 177 

which He so much desires ; and because of its 
utter opposition to His Divine Perfections. 
For being Himself the -Sovereign Good, Pure 
Light, and Infinite Beauty, He cannot but in- 
finitely abhor and detest sin, which is nothing 
but darkness, defect, and an insufferable defor- 
mity of our souls. 

So burning, indeed, is the hatred of the Lord 
against sin, that all that He has wrought both in 
the Old Testament and in the New had for its 
end the destruction of sin ; above all, the most 
holy Passion of His Son, Who (as some of 
God's enlightened servants have said) would, if 
needful, expose Himself anew to a thousand 
deaths, to destroy in us every fault, even the 
smallest 

These reflections will aid you to form an idea, 
however imperfectly, of the intensity with which 
the Lord desires to enter into your heart, in order 
that He might drive out and exterminate every 
enemy both of Himself and of you; and thus will 
you yourself be stirred up with a lively desire to 
receive Him, for the same object. 

The hope of the arrival of our Heavenly 
Captain will encourage and inspirit us to chal- 
lenge repeatedly the passion which we have set 
ourselves to overcome, and to repress it by a 
constant and deadly opposition, and to make 
acts of the contrary virtue ; and this you should 



7 



178 OF THE EUCHARIST 

continue to do, both on the evening and morning 
before the most Holy Communion. 

Then, when we are on the point of Com- 
municating, review for a moment all the faults of 
which, since your last Communion, you have 
been guilty, as though God did not exist, or 
as if He had not endured so much for you in 
the Mysteries of the Cross ; how you have pre- 
ferr.ed a trifling pleasure and the gratification of 
your own desires to the Will of God and His 
Honour; and thus with holy fear you will be 
ashamed at the sight of your ingratitude and 
unworthiness. But consider, again, how the 
boundless deep of your I^ord's Goodness calls 
to the deep of your ingratitude and unfaithful- 
ness, and approach Him with trustfulness, giv- 
ing Him a large place in your heart, that He 
may take absolute possession of it 

And you will be able to do this, as soon as 
you have driven out of your heart all attachment 
to creatures, closing it against them, that your 
Lord may enter it alone. 

After Communion, withdraw at once into the 
inner sanctuary of your heart, and having first 
adored Him, then with all lowliness and rever- 
ence converse thus in spirit with your Lord : — 
" Thou seest, O my only Good, how prone I am 
to offend Thee, and what power this passion 
exercises over me, and how in my own strength 



7 



\ 



OF PREPARA TION FOR COMMUNION 1 79 

I cannot free myself from it. This conflict, 
then, is chiefly Thine, and it is from Thee alone 
I can hope for victory, though I must do my 
part/' 

Then turn to the Eternal Father, and offer 
to Him His Blessed Son, Whom He has given 
to you, and Whom you now possess within you, 
as a thank-offering and for victory over yourself. 
Then, make a vigorous attack upon the passion, 
and wait in faith upon God for the victory, Who * 
will (though for awhile He may seem to delay) 
never fail you, if you, on your side, make every 
possible effort 



CHAPTER LV. 

C)oto toe ou5l)t to Prepare oiiroeltjeg for Communion 
in orDer to ercite toitl^in U0 Hobe. 

IN order to stir up within you the love of God, 
by means of this most Heavenly Sacra- 
ment, let your meditation on the preceding 
evening be upon His Love for you. 

You should consider how that Great and 
Almighty Lord, not content with having made 
you after His own image and likeness, and with 
having sent His Only-begotten Son on earth to 
suffer during three and thirty years for your sins, 



7 




f 



1 80 OF PREPARA TJON FOR COMMUNIOIT 

and to endure the most bitter sorrows and the 
painful death of the Cross for your redemption, 
was, besides all this, pleased to leave Him Avith 
you for your food and support in the most holy 
Sacrament of the Altar. 

Weigh well, beloved, the singular greatness of 
this Love, which, viewed on every side, is most 
perfect and matchless : — 

First, if we regard its duration, our God has 
loved us unceasingly and from all eternity ; as 
by His Divinity He is Eternal, so His Love is 
Eternal, whereby, before all worlds, He decreed 
in His Heart to give us His Son ii). this wonder- 
ful manner. 

Rejoicing at this thought, say to yourself with 
inward joy, "In those depths of eternity, my 
insignificant being was then so loved and 
esteemed by the Most High God, that He 
thought of me, and designed in His unspeakable 
Love to give me His Own Son for my food.'* 

Secondly, all other love, however great it 
may be, has a bound which it cannot pass, but 
the Love of our Lord is alone without mea- 
sure. 

Desiring, therefore, to fully satisfy it, He has 
given His Dear Son, co-equal to Himself in 
Majesty and Infinity, of One and the Same Sub- 
stance and Nature. Thus the Love is equal to 
the Gift, and the Gift to the Love ; and both 



A 



OF PREPARA TION FOR COMMUNION 1 8 1 

are so great, that nothing greater can be con- 
ceived by the human mind. 

Thirdly, God was not drawn to love us 
through any necessity or constraint, but His 
Own Intrinsic and Natural Goodness alone 
moved Him to love us with so great and so 
incomprehensible an affection. 

Fourthly, no work of ours or merit could 
have preceded this love, so as to induce this 
mighty Lord to show such amazing love towards 
our baseness ; but it must be owing to His free 
Bounty alone that He has given Himself wholly 
and entirely to us, His most unworthy creatures. 

Fifthly, if you direct your thoughts to the 
purity of this love, you will see that it is not, 
like the world's love, mixed with any self- 
interest. For the Lord has no need of our 
goods, being, without us, in Himself Alone most 
Blessed and most Glorious ; and He sheds forth 
His unspeakable Love and Beneficence upon us 
simply for our benefit, and not for His. 

Consider well this truth, and you will say 
in your heart, " How is it that a God so Great 
sets His Heart on so vile a creature? What 
could be Thy design, O King of Glor}' ? What 
dost Thou look for from me, who am but a 
little dust ? I see well, O my God, by the light 
of Thy burning Charity, that Thou hast but one 
design, which reveals to me most plainly the 



1 82 OF PREPARATION FOR COMMUNION 

disinterestedness of Thy love for me ; for Thou 
dost give me Thy Whole Self to be my Food, for 
no other purpose than that I should be wholly 
changed into Thee. And this Thou doest, not 
that Thou hast any need of me, but that, 
Thou living in me and I in Thee, I may by a 
loving union be changed into Thee, and my 
earthly heart be made with Thee a heart only 
Divine.'* 

Then, filled with wonder and joy at the thought 
of God's high esteem and love for you, and 
knowing that He, by His Almighty Love, seeks 
and desires only to draw your whole heart to 
Himself, detach yourself from all creatures, and 
from yourself also as one of them, and offer 
yourself without reserve as a whole bumt-oflfer- 
ing to your Lord, that His Love and His 
Divine pleasure may henceforth guide your 
understanding, your will, and your memory, and 
may regulate all your senses. 

Then, perceiving that nothing is so calculated 
to work in you these Divine effects, as a worthy 
reception of the most holy Sacrament of the 
Altar, open your heart for this purpose with the 
following ejaculations and loving aspirations : — 

" O most Heavenly Food, when will the hour 
come when I shall wholly sacrifice myself to 
Thee in the fire of Thy Love ? When, when ? O 
Love uncreated ! 



7 



\ 



OF PREPARATION FOR COMMUNION 1 83 

" O living Bread, when shall I live by Thee 
alone, for Thee alone, and to Thee alone? 
Oh ! when, my Life ? Blessed Life, Beautiful 
and Eternal? 

" O Heavenly Manna ! When shall I loathe 
all other earthly food, and crave for Thee alone 
— feed on Thee alone ? When shall this be, O 
my Sweetness, when, my only Good? O my 
Loving and Almighty Lord, deliver now my 
wretched heart from every attachment, and 
from every evil passion ; adorn it with Thy holy 
virtues, and with a pure intention of doing all 
things solely to please Thee ; that so I may open 
my heart to Thee, invite Thee, and with a sweet 
violence constrain Thee to come in, that Thou, 
O Lord, mayest then work in me, without 
resistance, all that Thou hast ever desired to 
effect" 

With such loving affections, you should exer- 
cise yourself in the evening and morning before 
Communion. Then, as the time of Communion 
draws near, consider what you are about to take ; 
no less than the Son of God, of Majesty Incom- 
prehensible, before Whom the Heavens and all the 
powers therein do tremble — the Holy of Holies, 
the Spotless Mirror, and the incomprehensible 
Purity, in comparison with Whom no creature is 
clean; the One Who, as a worm and an outcast of 
the people, willed for love of you to be rejected, 



7 



\ 



T 



1 84 OF PREPARA TION FOR COMMUNION 

trampled upon, mocked, spit upon, and crucified, 
by the malice and wickedness of the world. 
You are about to receive God, in Whose Hands 
are the life and death of the whole universe. 

Then, on the other hand, regard yourself; 
think how you are nothing, and that by your 
sins and wickedness you have made yourself 
lower than the vilest and foulest of the irrational 
creatures, and that you have rendered yourself 
worthy to be the sport and mockery of all the 
devils in hell ; how, instead of being grateful for 
such great and numberless benefits, you have 
in your capriciousness and wilfulness despised 
this so Mighty and so Loving a Lord, and 
trampled under foot His Precious Blood. 

Yet, notwithstanding all this. His Love abides. 
His Goodness is unchanged. He still invites you. 
to His Divine Banquet ; nay. He even constrains 
you to come to it, threatening you with death if 
you refuse His invitation. He shuts not the 
door of His Mercy, nor turns His back upon 
you, though by nature you have become leprous, 
lame, dropsical, blind, possessed by devils, and 
have *gone after many lovers.' 

He asks this of you and no more : 

First, to mourn for your offences against Him. * 

Second, to hate above all things sin, both 
great and small. 

Thirdly, to offer and give yourself wholly to 



\ 



/ 



OF PREPARA TION FOR COMMUNION 1 85 

do His Will and Bidding, ever with affection, 
and with action, when opportunity presents. 

Fourthly, to have faith and firm hope that 
He will forgive you, and cleanse you from your 
sins, and defend you from all your enemies. 

Fortified by this unspeakable Love of the 
Lord, you will draw near to communicate, with 
a holy and loving fear, saying: "Lord, I am 
not worthy to receive Thee, because I have so 
many, many times grievously offended Thee, 
nor have I yet mourned as much as I should, 
over the offences which I have committed against 
Thee." 

" Lord, I am not worthy to receive Thee, 
because I am not yet entirely free from affection 
to venial sins." 

" Lord, I am not worthy to receive Thee, for 
I have not yet wholly yielded myself up to Thy 
Love, Thy Will, and Thy Bidding." 

" O my Almighty Lord, infinitely Good, for 
the sake of Thy Goodness and Thy Word, make 
me worthy, O my Love, with this faith to receive 
Thee." 

When you have communicated, shut yourself 
up immediately in the secret recess of your 
heart, and setting aside all created things, hold 
converse with your Lord in some such form as 
the following : — "O Most High King of Heaven, 
what has brought Thee to me, who am miserable, 




n 



\Z6 OF PREPARATION FOR COMMUNION 

poor, blind, and naked?" And He will answer 
you — " Love." 

And you will reply to Him, **0 uncreated 
Love, sweet Love, what wilt Thou that I should 
give Thee?" 

And He will answer " only Love." " I will that 
no other fire should bum upon the altar of your 
heart, and in your sacrifices, and in all your 
works, but the fire of My Love, which, consum- 
ing all other love, and all self-will, will rise to 
Me as the sweetest odour. 

" This is what I have continually sought from 
you, and still seek, because I desire to be wholly 
thine, and that you should be wholly Mine; 
but such an union cannot be, till, having sur- 
rendered yourself entirely, which it is My great 
delight that you should do, you are delivered 
from all love of self, all love of your own 
opinion, all love of your own will and reputation. 

" I seek from you hatred of yourself, and I 
^vill give you in exchange My Love; I ask for 
your heart, that it may be united to Mine, for to 
this end was Mine pierced upon the Cross ; I 
ask you to give Me yourself without reserve, 
that I may be wholly yours. 

" You see that I am of infinite value ; yet of 
My Goodness I estimate myself at your value. 
Buy Me then now, beloved, by giving yourself 
for Me. 



\ 



7 



OF PREPARA TION FOR COMMUNION 1 87 

"I desire this of you, beloved, that you 
should have no other will than Mine, that all 
your thoughts, your aims, your desires, should 
be of Me and according to My Will, that I may 
will, think, intend, and see all that you will, 
think, intend, and see ; so that your nothingness 
may be swallowed up in the depth of My in- 
finity, and transformed into it. Thus will you 
be fully blest and happy in Me, and I completely 
contented in you." 

In conclusion, offer to the Father His only 
Son, first, for a thank-offering; then for your 
own needs, and those of all the Holy Church, 
and for all who belong to you, and to whom you 
are in any way bound, and for the souls who are 
being cleansed from the remaining stains of 
sins ; and make this offering in commemoration 
of, and in union with, that which He made of 
Himself, when He offered Himself to the Father, 
hanging upon the Cross, and covered with 
blood. 

And you may likewise unite your offering with 
all the sacrifices offered on that day in the Holy 
Catholic Church. 



\ 



1 88 OF SPIRITUAL COMMUNION 



CHAPTER LVI. 

©f Spiritual dommunion. 

ALTHOUGH we may not receive the Lord 
sacramentally more than once a day, yet 
we may, as I have before remarked, receive Him 
spiritually every hour, and every moment ; and 
nothing but negligence or some other fault on 
our part can deprive us of this privilege. 

Spiritual Communion may even be more 
advantageous to us and acceptable to God than 
many Sacramental Communions, when the latter 
are received with imperfect dispositions. 

As often then as you shall dispose yourself 
and prepare for spiritual Communion, you will 
find the Son of God ready to give Himself with 
His Own Hands to you for your spiritual food. 

By way of preparation, turn your thoughts to 
Him for this end \ and after a short examination 
of your failings, mourn with Him over your 
offences, and with all humility and faith beseech 
Him that He would vouchsafe to enter into your 
poor soul with some fresh gift of grace, to heal it 
and fortify it against the enemy. 

When about to do violence to yourself and 
to mortify some appetite, or to do some act of 
virtue, do all with the motive of preparing your 



OF SPIRITUAL COMMUNION 1 89 

heart for your Lord, Who is continually demand- 
ing this of you ; and then turn to Him and invite 
Him with earnestness to come with His Grace to 
heal you and deliver you from your enemies, to 
the end that He Alone may possess your heart 
Or else, calling to mind your last Sacramental 
Communion, say with enkindled heart, " When, 
my Lord, shall I again receive Thee ? — when ? 
when?" 

But if you desire to prepare yourself, and 
spiritually communicate in a more orderly 
manner; on the previous evening address all 
mortifications, acts of virtue, and every other 
good work to this end, that you may spiritually 
receive your Lord. 

And in the early morning, consider what 
great happiness and benefit the soul gains by 
worthily receiving the most holy Sacrament of 
the Altar (for in it lost virtue is regained, the 
soul is brought back to its first beauty and 
receives the fruits and merits of the Passion of 
the Son of God) ; and consider how pleasing it 
is to God, that we receive it and possess these 
blessings, so that you may inflame your heart 
with a great desire to receive it to give Him 
pleasure. 

When this desire is enkindled within you, 
turning to Him, say : " Inasmuch as it is not 
granted to me. Lord, to-day to receive Thee 



190 OF RETURNING THANKS 

Sacramentally, grant, O uncreated Goodness and 
Power, that I — every fault having been pardoned 
and healed — ^may now worthily receive Thee 
spiritually, every hour and every day, and 
provide me with fresh grace and strength against 
all my enemies, and particularly against that 
one, upon whom, for Thy pleasure, I am making 
war." 



CHAPTER LVIL 

®f returning; tSTTjanfes. 

SINCE all the good we have or do, is of God, 
and frdm God, we are bound to render 
thanks for all our virtuous exercises and victories, 
and for every benefit, particular and general, 
which we have received from His Pitiful Hand. 

And to do this in a proper manner, we must 
consider the end for which our Lord is moved 
to communicate His grace to us ; for, from this 
consideration and knowledge, we come to learn 
how God wills that we should return thanks. 

And since in every benefit the Lord princi- 
pally intends His own Honour, and to draw us 
to His love and service, first think with yourself 
in this way : " With what power, wisdom, and 
goodness, has my God granted and given to me 
this blessing and gr^ce T' 



OF OBLATION I9I 



Then, seeing that in you (as of yourself) there 
is nothing which could merit any blessing, but 
on the contrary nothing else but demerit and 
ingratitude, with profound humility address 
your Lord : " How is it, O Lord, that Thou 
deignest to regard a dead dog, bestowing so 
many benefits upon me ? May Thy Name be 
blessed for ever and ever !'* 

And lastly, seeing that by the benefit He 
seeks again to be loved and served by you, 
inflame yourself with love towards so loving a 
Lord, and with sincere desire to serve Him in 
His way. And therefore to this end you will 
add a full offering of yourself, such as may be 
made in the following manner. 



CHAPTER LVIII. 

2Df SDiJiatiot!. 

TO the end that the oblation of yourself may 
be on all sides pleasing to God, two things 
are necessary. One is, union with the offerings 
which Christ made to the Father ; the other is, 
that your will be detached from all irregular 
affection for the creature. 

By the first thing, you must know that the 
Son of God, when living in this vale of tears, 



V 



I792 OF OBLATION 



1 



offered to His Heavenly Father not only Him- 
self and His works, but with Himself us also and 
our works. 

So that our offerings must be made in union 
with, and trustful dependence upon His. 

For the second thing, consider well before 
you make your offering, whether your will has 
any attachment, for if so, it must first he dis- 
engaged from every affection ; and have recourse 
to God, in order that He, with His right Hand, 
may loose you ; so that, freed and delivered from 
all hindrance, you may be able to oflfer your- 
self to His Divine Majesty. 

And be very watchful on this point ; since, if 
you offer yourself to God, whilst some irregular 
affection for the creature remains, you do not 
offer yourself, but that which is another's, in 
that you are not your own, but belong to those 
creatures to whom your heart is given ; a thing 
which is displeasing to the Lord — ^as if it were 
your desire to mock Him. Hence it is, that so 
many oblations of ourselves not only return to 
us void and fruitless, but afterwards we fall into 
various defects and sins. 

We may offer ourselves to God, whilst still 
cleaving to the creatures, but it must be in order 
that by His Goodness we may be set free, so 
that we may be able to offer ourselves wholly to 
His Divine Majesty, and to His service; and 



\ 



OF OBLATION 1 93 



7 



this we should do often, and with great affec- 
tion. 

Let then your offering be without attachment, 
and without regard to your own desires, not 
aiming at earthly blessings or Heavenly, but 
purely at the Will and Providence of God, to 
which you ought entirely to submit, and to 
sacrifice yourself as a perpetual burnt-offering, 
and, weaned from all created things, say: 
" Behold, my Lord and Creator, each and every 
desire of mine is at the disposal of Thy Will and 
Eternal Providence; do with me as it pleases 
Thee, in life, in death, and after death ; in time, 
and in eternity." 

If you act thus in sincerity (which will be 
proved when some adversity arises) you will 
become from an earthly, a dealer in Heavenly 
and most blessed goods, for you shall be God's, 
and God shall be yours ; since He always abides 
with those who, tearing themselves away from 
all creatures and from themselves, give them- 
selves up entirely, and sacrifice themselves to 
His Divine Majesty. 

Here then, beloved, you see a most powerful 
way of overcoming all your enemies ; because 
if this offering so unites you to God, that you 
become wholly His, and He wholly yours, what 
enemy and what power can ever hurt you? 
And when you wish to offer to Him any of your 




194 OF OBLATION 



works, as fasts, prayers, acts of patience, or 
any other good deeds, first turn your mind to 
the offering which Christ made to the Father of 
His fasts, prayers, and other works; and in 
trustful dependence on the worth and virtue 
of these, offer then your own. 

When you wish to offer to your Heavenly 
Father the works of Christ, in satisfaction for 
your sins, you will do it in this manner. You 
will make a general, and sometimes a particular, 
review of your sins, and seeing clearly that it is 
not possible for you, of yourself, to appease the 
anger of God, nor to satisfy His Divine Justice, 
you will have recourse to the Life and Passion 
of His Son, and meditate upon some one of 
His actions ; as, for example, when He fasted, 
prayed, suffered, and shed His Blood ; here you 
will see that, in order to propitiate the Father, 
and to pay the debt of your iniquity. He of- 
fered Him these His Works, His Suffering and 
Blood, — as it were saying : " Behold, Eternal 
Father, what superabundant satisfaction I make 
to Thy Justice for the sins and trespasses of N. 
May it please Thy Divine Majesty to foi^ve 
them, and to receive that person into the num- 
ber of Thine elect" 

Then make the same offering, and offer these 
prayers for yourself, to the Father Himself, 
imploring Him that, by virtue of them, He 



\ 



OF SENSIBLE DEVOTION I95 

would forgive you every debt. And this you 
can do, not only by passing from one Mystery 
to another, but also from one act to another in 
the same Mystery; and this mode of offering 
may serve not only for yourself, but also for 
others. 



CHAPTER LIX. 

flDf ^engfible Dcljotion anD of 2)rptie00. 

SENSIBLE devotion arises sometimes from 
nature, sometimes from the devil, and 
sometimes from grace. You will be able from 
its fruits to discern its source ; since if it does 
not produce amendment of life, your only doubt 
will be, whether it proceeds from the devil, or 
from nature; and especially, if it is accompanied 
by a greater relish and sweetness, and attach- 
ment, and a certain self-esteem. 

When, therefore, you shall feel your mind 
filled with spiritual sweetness, do not stop to 
dispute about the source from whence it comes; 
and do not lean upon it, nor suffer yourself to 
be taken off from the thought of your own 
nothingness; but with greater diligence and 
hatred of self, study to keep your heart free from 
all attachment, even to spiritual things, and seek 
God alone, and His good pleasure ; for in this 




196 OF SENSIBLE DEVOTION 

way the delight — ^whether it spring from nature 
or from the devil — ^will be changed into an effect 
of grace to you. 

Dryness may likewise proceed from these 
three causes. 

From the devil, to make the mind lukewarm, 
and to cause it to turn from spiritual exertion to 
the occupations and delights of the world. 

From ourselves, through our faults, earthly 
attachments, and neglects. 

From grace, either to give us warning, that 
we should be more diligent to forsake every 
attachment and employment which is not of God, 
and does not terminate in Him ; or, to make us 
learn by experience, that all our good things 
come from Him ; or, that we may for the future 
more highly esteem His gifts, and be more 
humble and cautious in preserving them ; or, 
that we may unite ourselves more closely to 
His Divine Majesty with entire self-renunciation 
even as to spiritual delights, that our affections 
may not be so attached to them as to divide the 
heart which the Lord would have wholly for 
Himself; or else, because He is pleased to see 
us put forth all our strength in battle, and use 
His grace. 

If you then should feel dry, enter into your- 
self, that you may discover from what fault of 
your own you have been deprived of sensible 



7 



\ 



OF SENSIBLE DEVOTION 1 97 

devotion ; and against it make war, not with 
the motive of recovering a consciousness of 
grace, but in order that you may remove what 
is displeasing to God. 

And if you cannot find out the fault, let your 
sensible devotion be true devotion, which is 
prompt resignation to the Will of God. But on 
no account leave off any of your devotions, but 
pursue them with all your might, however fruit- 
less and distasteful they may appear to you; 
drinking willingly the cup of bitterness, which 
in this dryness the loving Will of God holds out 
to you. 

And if at times dryness is accompanied with 
such great and thick darkness of mind, that you 
neither know which way to turn, nor what step 
to take, yet be not dismayed, remain alone and 
firm upon the Cross, far from every earthly 
delight, even though it should be offered you by 
the world or by any creature. 

Conceal your suffering from every one except 
your spiritual father, and disclose it to him, not 
with a view of alleviating pain, but in order to 
learn how to bear it according to God's pleasure. 

Let Communion, prayer, and other exercises 
be used, not that you may come down from the 
cross, but to receive the strength to exalt that 
cross to the greater glory of the Crucified. And 
when you are unable to meditate, through con- 



// 




7 



198 OF SENSIBLE DEVOTION 

fusion of mind, and cannot pray as usual, 
meditate as best you can. And what you can- 
not accomplish with the understanding, make a 
violent effort to effect with the will and with 
words, holding converse with yourself, and with 
your Lord ; for this will have wonderful effects, 
and thus your heart will gain breath and 
strength. 

You can then in such a case say : " Why art 
thou cast down, O my soul ? and why art thou 
disquieted within me ? hope thou in God : for I 
shall yet praise Him, Who is the health of my 
countenance, and my God." "Why standest 
Thou so far off, O Lord, and hidest Thy Face 
in the needful time of trouble ? Forsake me 
not utterly." 

And remembering the sacred teaching which 
God imparted in time of tribulation to His 
beloved Sarah, the wife of Tobias, make use of 
it also, and say aloud : " But whoso serveth 
Thee knows assuredly, that his life, if passed in 
trial, will be crowned ; if in tribulation, will be 
freed ; and if in chastisement, he may fly to Thy 
Mercy. For Thou delightest not in our destruc- 
tion; for Thou makest a calm to succeed a 
storm, and after tears and weeping. Thou 
infusest joy. Be Thy Name, O God of Israel, 
blessed for ever !'* Tob, iii. 

You will remember also your Christ, Who, in 



\ 



OF SENSIBLE DEVOTION 1 99 

the Garden and on the Cross, was, to His great 
pain, abandoned by His Heavenly Father, as 
far as the feeling of comfort was concerned ; and, 
bearing the cross with Him, with all your heart 
say, "Thy Will be done." . By doing so, your 
patience and prayer will raise the flame of your 
heart's sacrifice into the presence of God, leaving 
you truly devout ; true devotion (as I have said 
to you) consisting in a lively and firm readiness 
of will to follow Christ with the cross on your 
shoulder, by whatever way He invites and calls 
us to Himself, to desire God for God, and at 
times to leave God for God. 

And if. by this, and not by devotional feelings, 
many persons (and especially women), who aim 
at a spiritual life, would measure their progress, 
they would not be deceived by themselves nor 
by the devil, nor would they uselessly, or rather 
ungratefully, complain of so much good which 
the Lord has done them ; but they would strive 
with greater earnestness to serve His Divine 
Majesty, Who disposes and permits all things for 
His Glory, and our good. 

And here, again, do women deceive them- 
selves, who guard themselves with fear and 
prudence from every occasion of sin ; but when 
at times they are molested by horrible, filthy, 
and fearful thoughts, and also sometimes by 
most loathsome visions, they are confounded, 



/ 




i 



and lose heart, and make themselves believe that 
they are forsaken by, and wholly banished from 
God, and cannot persuade themselves that the 
Holy Spirit can abide in a mind filled with such 
thoughts. 

Thus, continuing much cast down, they are 
ready to despair, and, having left all their good 
exercises, to return to Egypt 

They do not well understand what grace the 
Lord bestows on them ; for He suffers such per- 
sons to be assailed by these spirits of temptation, 
to bring them back to the knowledge of them- 
selves, and in order that, by feeling their need of 
Him, they may draw near to Him. 

Therefore they ungratefully complain of that, 
for which they ought to feel themselves in- 
debted to His infinite Goodness. I 

What you ought to do in such cases is, to \ 
bring yourself low by the consideration of your I 
perverse inclinations, which, God wills for your 
good that you should know, are prone to every 
sin, even the most grievous ; and that, without 
His succour, you would rush to utter ruin. 

And from this enter into a state of hope and 
confidence, and gather that He is ready to help 
you, since He makes you see the danger, and 
wishes to draw you nearer to Himself by prayer 
and by recourse to Him ; for this, therefore, you 
ought to render Him most humble thanks. And 



\ 



OF THE EXAMINATION OF CONSCIENCE 20I 

be assured that such spirits of temptation and 
filthy thoughts are better banished by a patient 
endurance of the pain, and by dexterous diversion 
of the mind, than by a too anxious resistance. 



CHAPTER LX. 

SDf t^c Q£]camtttation of Conscience. 

IN the examination of conscience consider 
three things : — 

The falls of that day; 

The cause of them ; and. 

The energy and promptness which you main- 
tain in making war against them, and in acquir- 
ing the contrary virtue. 

As to the falls, you will do what I advised you 
in the chapter on "When we are wounded.'* 

The cause of these falls you will be constrained 
to subdue and bring to the ground. 

The will to do this, and to acquire virtues, 
must be fortified by distrust of self, by trust in 
God, by prayer, and by a multitude of acts of 
hatred of the vice, and of desire for the contrary 
virtue. 

You should suspect the victories and good 
works you have accomplished. 

Besides that, I do not advise you to think 



/ 




202 OF FIGHTING EVEN UNTO DEA TH 

much about them, because of the risk, almost 
inevitable, of at least some hidden motive of 
vain-glory and pride. 

Then leave all that is behind, whatever it may 
be, to the mercy of God, and consider how much 
yet remains for you to do. 

Then, in a strain of thankfulness for the gifts 
and favours which the Lord has bestowed on 
you during that day, acknowledge Him as the 
Doer of all good, and return thanks to Him for 
having rescued you from so many open enemies, 
and from so many more hidden ones ; for having 
given you good thoughts, and occasions of virtue, 
and for all other benefits which you may not 
have known though you received them. 



CHAPTER LXI. 

5)oto in t\\t TBattTf toe fjaUe nreu of cotttinumg l\t 
%trua:gcff rtjrit unto Deatfj. 

AMONGST other things which are in request 
in this combat, one is the perseverance 
with which we ought to mortify incessantly our 
passions, which are never dead in this life ; but, 
on the contrary, like evil weeds, spring up 
hourly. 

And this is a battle which only ends when life 



f 



T 



OF FIGHTING EVEN UNTO DEA TH 203 

ends, so that there is no escape for us from it ; 
for he who does not fight in it, is of necessity 
either taken captive or killed. 

Besides, we have to do with enemies who bear 
us an unceasing hatred, therefore we can never 
hope for peace from them, nor for a truce, inas- 
much as they slay those most cruelly who most 
seek to make friends of them. 

You have no need, on that account, to fear 
their power and number, since in this battle no 
one can be a loser except he wills to be. And 
the whole strength of our enemies is held in the 
Hand of our Captain, for Whose honour we 
have to contend. 

He not only will not suffer you to be over- 
borne, but He will even take up arms for you, 
and, being more powerful than all your adver- 
saries. He will give the victory into your hand ; 
if only you will fight manfully together with 
Him, and not trust in yourself, but in His Power 
and Goodness. 

And if the Lord does not so quickly grant you 
the victory, do not lose heart, but be the more 
certain (and this will help you to fight con- 
fidently) that every thing which happens to you 
— even those which seem most unlikely to lead 
to, nay, which seem opposed to, victory (of 
whatever kind they may be) — He will overrule 
to your good and advantage, if you will only 



T 



204 HOW TO PREPARE FOR DEATH 

conduct yourself as a faithful and generous 
warrior. 

You then, beloved, following your Heavenly 
Captain, Who for you has overcome the world, 
and has willed to die Himself, give yourself with 
a courageous heart to this battle, and to the j 
utter destruction of all your foes ; for if you 
leave but one alive, he will be as a beam in 
your eye and a thorn in your side, which will 
retard you in the course of so glorious a victory. 



CHAPTER LXII. • 

I 

Doto to prepare oiiriBeftJCS na:aiii0t tht Ctiemfce 

VdTjo ajatfiiault tijsi toljeti tuc are Dping:. ■ 

ALTHOUGH our whole life is a continual 
warfare on earth, yet the chief and most 
signal struggle is at the last hour of the great 
passage, since he who falls at that moment does 
not rise any more. 

This is what you have to do now, that you 
may be found well prepared then ; you must in 
the present time whidi is given you fight man- 
fully, for he who fights well in life will, by the 
good habit which he has already formed, easily 
gain the victory in his last moments. 

Besides this, think often on death with careful 
consideration, so, when it comes upon you, you 



\ 



HOW TO PREPARE FOR DEATH 



20S 



will fear it less, and your mind will be free and 
ready for the conflict. 

Worldly men fly from this thought, lest it 
disturb their delight in earthly things, on which 
they have willed to set their affections, so that 
the thought of having to quit them gives them 
pain. Thus the inordinate affection for them 
does not diminish, but on the contrary takes 
more and more possession of them, so that the 
idea of separation from this life, and from things 
so dear to them, is unspeakably distressing, and 
often most so to those who have longest made 
them their delight. 

That you may be able to make this important 
preparation the better, imagine yourself some- 
times to be alone, without any help, and in the 
anguish of death, and gather before your mind 
the following things which are likely to give 
you imeasiness at that time; then think over the 
remedies, which I shall bring you, so that you 
may be able to use them the better in that 
last strait ; for the blow which can be given 
but once should be well learnt beforehand, 
lest an error be committed which cannot be 
repaired. 



7 



X 



.= 



206 OF THE ASSA ULT UPON FAITH 



CHAPTER LXIII. 

©f JFour 9l00ault0 of is\xt ^nemiciJ at i\t time of 
Dpinn:3 anD fir^t of tT)e Jlgf^autt upon JTaitT;, ann 
of t!je fanner of uefentJing: ouc^eltjed. 

THERE are four principal and most dan- 
gerous assaults, which our enemies are 
wont to make against us at the time of death. 

They are; temptation of faith, despair, vain- 
glory, and various illusions and transformations 
of devils into angels of light. 

As to the first assault ; if the enemy begin 
to tempt you with his false arguments, retire at 
once from the understanding to the will, saying: 
" Get thee behind me, Satan, father of lies, for 
I will not even hear thee ; enough for me to 
believe what the Holy Catholic Church believes." 

And do not, as far as possible, give place to 
questions about the faith, however plausible they 
may seem, but regard them as prompted by the 
devil in order to stir up anxiety. 

But if, however, you are not in time to turn 
your thoughts quite away, stand firm and 
unmoved, so as not to yield to any reason or 
authority of Scripture, which the adversary may 
allege; for all will be garbled, or* wrongly 
quoted or misinterpreted, although it may 
appear to you to be good, clear, and conclusive. 



T 



OF THE ASSA ULT OF DESPAIR 207 

And if the subtle serpent demands of you 
what the Catholic Church believes, do not 
answer him, but seeing his device, and that he 
only wants to catch you in your words, make an 
inward act of more lively faith ; or else, to make 
him burst with indignation, reply, that the Holy 
Catholic Church believes the truth ; and if the 
Evil One should ask in return, "What is the 
truth?" you reply, *'Even that which she 
believes." 

Above all, ever keep your heart intent upon 
the Crucified, saying: "My God, my Creator 
and Saviour, haste Thou to help me, and forsake 
me not, that I part not with the truth of the 
Holy Catholic Faith ; and may it please Thee, 
that as in this faith by Thy grace I was bom, so 
in it, to Thy glory, I may end this mortal life." 



CHAPTER LXIV. 

SDf tl^c a0$ault of De0pair, anu of itiEi Hemeup. 

THE second assault, whereby the perverse 
demon strives to accomplish our over- 
throw, is the terror which he works in us by the 
remembrance of our sins, in order that we may 
cast ourselves headlong into the pit of despair. 
In this danger, hold fast this certain rule, that 




2o8 OF THE ASSAULT OF DESPAIR 

the thoughts of your sins are the result of grace, 
and for your salvation, when they produce in 
you humility, sorrow for having offended God, 
and confidence in His Goodness. But when the 
thoughts disquiet you, and render you distrust- 
ful and faint-hearted, even though the things 
seem to you true and enough to lead you to 
persuade yourself that you are condemned, and 
that the day of salvation for you is past, con- 
vince yourself that they are merely the work of 
the deceiver; humble yourself the more, and 
trust the more in God, so that in this way you 
shall overcome the enemy with his own weapons, 
and bring glory to. the Lord. 

Mourn, indeed, over your offence against 
God, every time it comes to your memory, but 
yet seek pardon, trusting to His Passion. 

And, further, I say to you, that if God Him- 
self should seem to say that you are not of His 
sheep, yet you ought in nowise to let go your 
confidence in Him, but humbly say : " You have 
reason indeed, O my Lord, on account of my 
sins, to cast me away for ever, but I have greater 
reason on account of Thy mercy to hope for 
Thy pardon. Therefore, I ask of Thee the 
salvation of this miserable creature, condemned 
by its own sinfulness, but redeemed with the 
price of Thy blood. I wish Thee, my Redeemer, 
to save me for Thy own glory ; and, with con- 



7 



\ 



OF THE ASSAULT OF VAIN-GLORY 20^^ 

fidence in Thy infinite Mercy, I leave myself 
entirely in Thy Hands. Do with me as Thou 
pleasest, for Thou art my only Lord; even if 
Thou slay me, yet my hope will I keep alive in 
Thee." 



CHAPTER LXV. 

fiDf tl&e awauft of Vain^glotp. 

THE third assault is of vain-glory and 
presumption. In this matter, you must 
not permit yourself in any imaginable way to be 
drawn into the very least complacency in your- 
self, or in your works. Let your delight be in 
your Lord Alone, in His Mercy, and in the 
works of His Life and Passion. 

Abase yourself ever more and more in your 
own eyes, even to your last breath ; and of every 
good deed done by you, which may come before 
you, recognize God Alone for its Author. Have 
recourse to Him for help, but do not expect it 
on account of your own merits, however many 
and great be the battles in which you have been 
victorious. Ever preserve a spirit of holy fear, 
acknowledging sincerely that all your precau- 
tions would be in vain, if God did not gather 
you under the shadow of His wings, in Whose 
protection alone you will confide. 




i lO OF THE ASSAULT OF ILLUSIONS 

By following this advice, your enemies shall not 
be able to prevail against you. And thus will 
you open the road which will lead you joyfully 
to the Heavenly Jerusalem. 



CHAPTER LXVI. 

©f i\t a0!Biault of 3!llu6ton$ anu JFalpe appear- 
ances at tlje point of iDeatTj. 

IF our obstinate enemy, who is never tired 
of troubling us, assails you by false appear- 
ances, by transformations of himself into an 
angel of light, stand firm and unshaken in the 
knowledge of your own nothingness, and say 
to him daringly : " Return, unhappy one, into 
your darkness, for I am unworthy of visions, nor 
have I need of anything but the Mercy of my 
Jesus, and the prayers of the Virgin Mary, of St. 
Joseph, and of the other Saints." 

And if, nevertheless, it appears to you that 
these things come from Heaven, by many almost 
convincing signs, yet refuse them, and drive them 
as far as possible from you. Fear not lest this 
resistance, founded on your own unworthiness, 
be displeasing to the Lord ; since if the thing be 
from Him, He knows how to make it clear to 
you, and you will lose nothing j because He Who 

/ ^ 



OF THE ASS A UL T OF ILL U SIGNS 211 

gives grace to the humble, does not withdraw it 
for acts which are done through humility. 

These are the weapons which the enemy most 
commonly employs against us in our last journey. 

He tempts each one according to his par- 
ticular bent, — in that to which he knows him to 
be most inclined. Therefore, before the hour of 
the great conflict approaches, we ought to arm 
ourselves well, and fight valiantly against our 
strongest passions, and against those which have 
the greatest mastery over us ; so that the victory 
may be easier in that time, which will leave us 
no other time for action afterwards. 

" Fight against them, until they be consumed." 
I Sam, XV. 1 8. 



J^ 



V 



^■^^^^ 



SUPPLEMENT 

1 

i 



TO 



Cte Spiritual Combat 



/ ^ 



CHAPTER I. 

CCI^at 10 t^c Haturc ef €\)xmian Perfection. 

THAT you may not weary yourself in vain, 
O devout soul, in spiritual exercises, as 
many have done, and not run without knowing 
whither you are tending, you tnust first learn in 
what Christian perfection consists. 

Christian perfection is nothing else but the 
entire observance of the precepts of God and 
of His Law with the view of pleasing Him, 
without swerving to the right hand or to the left, 
or turning back. " For this is the whole duty 
of man." 

So that the scope of a Christian's whole life, 
if he would become perfect, must be to strive to 
form the habit day by day of putting self more 
and more aside, and of giving up his own will, 
that he may do all things according to the 
guidance of the Will of God Alone, and in order 
to please and honour Him. 



// 



2 T 6 OF CHRISTIAN PERFECTION 



CHAPTER II. 

2Df t^c l!5ecej(0itp of a CTonflict in orucr to gain <V^xit* 
tian perfection. 

THE great lesson which we have before us 
has been told in few words, but to have 
to take it in hand, and td put it into practice, 
" this is the work, this is the toil." 

For as there is in us, through the sin of our 
first parents, and through the evil habits we have 
ourselves formed, a law contrary to the law of 
God, we have to fight against ourselves, and 
also against the world and the devil — the excit- 
ing causes of our conflicts. 



CHAPTER III. 

CDf ^ree '€lt>iH(j0 toljut are neetrful f<>t tte ^otwigf 
Pointer of Ct)ri0t. 

HAVING- then declared war, young soldier 
of Christ, you have need of three 
things : a heart courageous and resolute for the 
conflict, arms, and the knowledge how to use 
them. 

Resolution for the conflict will be acquired 
by frequently considering that the life of man 



1 \ 



OF RESISTANCE ^ 1 7 

upon earth is a warfare, and that the law of this 
warfare is, that he who does not fight as he 
ought, shall without doubt perish for ever. 

Courage will be gained, first by distrust of 
self and by great trust in God, and by the firm 
conviction that He is within you to rescue you 
from danger. Whenever, then, you are assaulted 
by enemies, be assured, that as often as, dis- 
trusting your own power and wisdom, you turn 
with confidence to the Power, Wisdom, and 
Goodness of God, you will come off victorious 
in the conflict. 

Your arms are resistance and violence. 



CHAPTER IV. 

€)f Ue^isittncc atili 15^ioIence, atrtJ of x\t 'fitt of 

RESISTANCE and violence, though cum- 
brous and painful weapons, are neverthe- 
less necessary for winning the victory. These 
arms are to be Used in the following way. 

When you are attacked by your corrupt will, 

and evil habits, which would hinder you from 

willing and doing what God wills, you must 

resist them, saying, "Yes, yes, I will do it." 

With the same resistance you should oppose 



/ 



T 



2 1 8 OF RESISTANCE 

them, when you feel yourself drawn towards the 
desires of bad habits and of the corrupt will, 
saying, " No, no, I will to do the Will of God, 
with His help. O my God, make haste to help 
me, lest this desire ever to do Thy Will, which 
through Thy grace is now present with me, be 
stifled, when temptation arises, by the old and 
corrupt will.'* 

And if you feel great pain in resisting* and 
weakness of will, you must use all manner of 
violence, remembering that "the Kingdom of 
Heaven suffereth violence," and that "the 
violent," against themselves, and their own 
passions, " take it by force." And if the pain 
and violence be so great as to fill your heart 
with anguish, go in spirit to Christ in the Gar- 
den, and unite your anguish with His, and pray 
Him that by virtue of His, He would give you 
victory over yourself, that so from your heart 
you may be able to say, " Not as I will, but as 
Thou wilt. Thy Will be done." 

Then bend your will again and again to the 
Will of God, willing as He wills you to will. 
Strive to perform some action with such fulness 
and purity of intention, as if in it alone all 
perfection consisted, and the whole pleasure and 
honour of God. And afterwards do the second, 
third, fourth, and the others, in the same way. 

Further, if the memory of some past tfans- 



7 



\ 



OF CONTINUAL WA TCHFULNESS 2 1 9 

gression come to your mind, grieve over the 
fault, and summon up greater courage to obey 
God in the precept in which you have trans- 
gressed, and in any other with which you may 
be concerned. And here I would remind you 
(in order that you may not omit any occasion of 
obeying God, however trifling it may be) that 
if you obey God in little things, He will give you 
fresh grace, which will make obedience easy in 
greater things. 

Also make it a habit, when any Divine pre- 
cept presents itself to your thoughts, first to 
adore God, and then to pray Him that, when 
an opportunity offers. He would enable you to 
obey Him. 



CHAPTER V. 

tSTl^at toe !}ar)c neeu to CHatc^ continual)) ober out CCtiU, 
00 a0 to titiscober tl^e particular pa^jgton to tolbtclti 
it inclineis. 

ENTER into yourself as deeply as possible, 
in order to find out to which of your 
passions your will is most often inclined ; for by 
it, more than by any other, it will be seduced 
and held in bondage. 

For since the will of man is unaccustomed to 



/ 




22Q OF LOVE OF SELF 

lack the companionship of some one of the 
passions, it must needs either love or hate, desire 
or shun, rejoice or r^jet, hope or despair, be 
fearful or daring, or be angry. 

When you find it to be influenced by some 
passion, not as God wills, but as its own self- 
love wiUs, take pains to bend it from the love of 
self to the love of God, and to the observance 
of the precepts of God, and of His Law. And 
this you should do, not only with strong passions, 
such as those which lead to mortal sins, but 
also with those which are the occasion of venial 
faults ; for these, when they are allowed, though 
they move lightly and tread veiy softly, keep us 
nevertheless weak and without vigour, and in 
great peril of falling into mortal sin. 



CHAPTER VI. 

l^oto bp rfmoUing tlje fiMt Paesiion, to^icti 10 JLobc of 
tljc Creature anD of %elf, anu bp gibing it to ®oli, 
aff tije re0t totU be tocfl ^aegulateti anti SDmcreu. 

THAT you may free your will in a speedy 
and orderly manner from inordinate 
passions, you must set yourself wholly to subdue 
and regulate the first passion, which is love ; for 
when this is brought into order, all the rest will 



\ 



OF LOVE OF SELF 221 

follow it by degrees, since they spring out of it, 
and in it have their root and life. 

You will clearly see this, as we proceed ; for 
according to a man's love for anything so is his 
desire for it, and his delight in it ; and according 
to his love he either hates, or shuns, or is grieved 
by that which hinders or offends the thing loved. 
Neither does he hope for anything, except for 
that which he loves ; and of the Same does he 
despair, when the difficulty of obtaining it seems 
invincible and insurmountable. Neither is he 
fearful, bold, or enraged, except concerning some- 
thing which hinders or offends the object of his 
love. 

The way to conquer and regulate this first 
passion is, to consider the objects of its love and 
attachment, their qualities, and what end it has 
in view in this attachment and love. And, 
finding in it qualities of beauty and of goodness, 
and claims of delight and usefulness, you may 
say again and again to yourself : " Can anything 
exceed the Beauty and Goodness of God, Who is 
the Sole Source of all goodness and perfection ?" 

" And what claim to usefulness and delight can 
be imagined greater than that which is to be 
found in the love of God, since that love trans- 
forms a man into Him, and makes him rejoice 
and delight in Him Alone ?" 

Moreover, the heart of man belongs to God, 

/ ^ 



J 



222 OF NEED OF SUCCOUR 

because God first made, and then redeemed it, 
and day by day, by new benefits, lays claim to it, 
saying : " My son, give Me thy heart." 

Thus, the heart of man belonging wholly to 
God, for many reasons which shall be given here- 
after, and being all too little to discharge its 
obligations to Him, every one should be most 
jealous over it, that it love God Alone, and the 
things which are pleasing to God, and in the 
degree and manner which are most pleasing to 
Him. 

We must exercise the same jealousy in 
watching over the passion of hatred (for on the i 
two passions, hatred and love, rests the whole | 
fabric of perfection), so as to hate nothing but • 
sin, and whatever leads to sin. | 



CHAPTER VII. 

tSTIiat t%t i^uman CCtiH 0tanu0 in neen of Succour. 

OUR will, thus under the influence of the 
passions, is very weak in resisting and 
overcoming them, and making them submissive 
to God, and to His obedience. (As experience 
well shows, for even when it desires and proposes 
to mortify itself, yet is it often stifled by its pas- 
sions, and all its purposes and resolutions vanish, 



\ 



OF OVERCOMING THE WORLD 223 

whilst it falls a prey to them.) It stands, 
therefore, in need of succour and assistance, not 
only in the time of trial, but beforehand ; that 
so, being strengthened against itself, it may gain 
the victory, and, freed from the tyranny of the 
passions, give itself up wholly to God and to His 
good pleasure. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

i^oto tl^e naill of C^an 10 greatly ^trenjytlbeneiJ bp 
oljercomingf tljc CHorln. 

SINCE our passions are stirred and fed by 
the world and the things of the world, 
when its greatness, riches, and delights are set 
before us, it evidently follows, that when the world 
and the things of the world are trodden under 
foot, the will of man begins to breathe freely and 
to turn elsewhere ; for it cannot remain without 
an object to love and delight in. 

The way to trample the world under foot is 
to penetrate into the real nature of its gifts and 
promises. 

And in doing this, lest we should err, from 
being blinded, it may be, by some passion, we 
will take for our consideration and conclusion 
the words of the wisest of men, Solomon, who 
had had experience of all earthly greatness. 



\ 



" Vanity of vanities," saith he, " all is vanity 
and vexation of spirit" 

Every day afifords a fresh evidence of this 
truth ; for man's heart desires to be satisfied, and 
yet if it had all it desired, not only would it fail 
to be satisfied, but it would hunger still more. 
And this is so, because, in feeding on the things 
of the world, it feeds upon shadows and dreams, 
on unrealities and lies, — things which cannot 
nourish. 

The promises of the world are false, and fiill 
of deception. It promises one thing for another. 
It promises happiness and gives misery. In very 
many cases it promises and gives no fulfilment 
It gives, and quickly takes away ; and if it does 
not quickly take away, it only the more afflicts 
those who indulge their passions, and who fix 
their desires in the mire. To such it may be 
said : * O ye sons of men, how long will ye be 
vexed ? wherefore do ye have such pleasure in 
vanity, and seek after leasing ? ' 

But let it be granted that in a certain sense 
the apparent blessings of this world are real 
blessings, what will they say of the rapidity with 
which man's life passes away ? Where is the hap- 
piness, where the greatness, and the pride of 
princes, kings, and emperors ?• It is all gone. 

The way then to overcome the world in such 
a manner that it may become loathsome to you, 



7 



\ 



OF THE SECOND AID TO THE WILL 



225 



and you to it, or I should rather use the words, 
that it may be crucified unto you, and you to it, 
is, before your will is set upon it, to regard most 
attentively first with the understanding, and then 
with the will, its vanities and falsehood ; that so, 
the understanding and will being free from the 
influence of the passions, you may easily despise 
it, and be able to say to every creature that pre- 
sents itself: "Art thou a creature ? Away with, 
away with all attachment to you, for in the crea- 
ture I seek the Creator, and my affection is for 
the spiritual, not the corporeal" 

" He Who gives you life and virtue, and not 
you, is the One I will and desire to love." 



CHAPTER IX. 

flDf tlbc ^cconD 2titi to tl^c WlxW. 

THE second aid to the human will consists 
in putting to flight the Prince of darkness, 
as the author of every inordinate kindling of 
the passions. We drive away and conquer this 
enemy every time we subdue and conquer our 
own lusts and inordinate desires. If then you 
wish to make the devil flee from you, resist your 
passions, for this is the resistance St James 
would have us make to him. 




226 OF THE SECOND AID TO THE WILL 

And here I would remind you, that the devil 
sometimes so assaults us by inflaming the lusts 
of the flesh and the passions, that man seems 
constrained to yield. But you need not be 
dismayed; only resist, and be convinced that 
God is with you, and will not suffer you to be 
oppressed. Resist, I say, and for certain, if you 
persevere, you shall conquer. 

This I said, " if you persevere," for it is not 
enough to resist once, or twice, or thrice, but 
every time that you are tempted. For it is the 
custom of the devil to try to-morrow what he 
could not do to-day, and next week what he 
could not accomplish in this ; and thus he goes 
on, continuously from time to time, with much 
patience, now with fury and then with craftiness, 
till he gains his point. 

Therefore you have need to be constant, ever 
on your.guard ; do not trust to the victories you 
have already gained, however many they may 
be; seeing that man's life is a continual warfare, 
the victory in it depends on the end, and not on 
to-day or to-morrow. 

Apd know that, if this resistance is painful to 
you, it is far more painful to the devil to be 
resisted. 

Hence for your consolation you may say to 
him, "Go, infernal demon, and endure torment; 
but since you suffer through your wickedness, 

/ \ 



OF TEMPTATIONS TO SPIRITUAL PRIDE 227 

and I, lest I offend my Lord, your pain shall be 
eternal, and mine, by the grace of God, shall be 
changed into eternal peace." 



CHAPTER X. 

SDf tJEemptatfonp to Spiritual Ptiue. 

I HAVE spoken to you in the preceding 
chapter of the temptations which the devil 
is wont to present to us by means of the great- 
ness, riches, and delights of the world ; but I 
now will speak of the temptations of spiritual 
pride, self-complacency, and vain-glory, which 
are so much the more dangerous and terrible as 
they are the less obvious, and the more opposed 
to God. 

Oh ! how many brave soldiers and great 
servants of God, after many many years of 
victory, have been overthrown by this pride, 
and have become servants of Lucifer ! 

The escape from this tremendous fall and 
subtle snare is by fearing at all times, and by 
doing good works with fear and trembling, lest 
through some hidden worm of self-love and 
pride they be contaminated and rendered offen- 
sive to God Therefore, in the doing of them, 
whilst humbling ourselves, always strive to do 




228 OP THE HUMAN WILL 

them better, as though hitherto we had never 
done any thing well. But if we think that we 
have done all things well (which we ought never 
to think), we ought still to say with our whole 
heart, " We are unprofitable servants." 

Above all, we must frequently have recourse 
to Christ, that He may deliver us from all pride, 
and teach us and help us to become lowly in heart; 
and often seek the help of the most lowly Mother 
of God, praying that she might obtain for us true 
humility, which is the foundation of all virtues, 
and which causes them to grow and accompanies 
them, so that they be not lost, but increased 
and preserved. 

Having already spoken at length on the 
subject of humility in the " Spiritual Combat," 
I will not now say more upon it 



CHAPTER XL 

2Df t\t €t)irti aiD of \\z !^uman CjCIin. 

THE third succour of the will, which we 
must very often have recourse to, is 
prayer. Accustom yourself, whenever you are 
assailed, to turn instantly to God, saying : " O 
God, make speed to save me : O Lord, make 
haste to help me." 



r 



\ 



OF KEEPING IN THE PRESENCE OF GOD 229 

Let your combat then be carried on with 
prayer, and with resistance in the presence of 
God, and be ever clothed with distrust of self and 
trust in Him ; fighting in this manner and with 
these arms, you may make sure of victory. 
What things may not be overcome and resisted 
by prayer? What things may not by resistance 
be repulsed, when accompanied with distrust of 
self and trust in God ? And what is the conflict 
I in which he can be worsted, who stands in the 
Presence of God with the determination to please 
Him? 



CHAPTER XII. 

3In toljat 5JHap a ®an ma]? gain tl^e K^abit of Ifeeeptnff 
in tf)e Preiaifnce of (Z5oti toljcnefter t)c toill. 



THAT you may acquire the habit of keeping 
yourself, whenever you will, in the 
Presence of God, strive to grasp the thought 
that God is secretly ever before you, that He 
is beholding you, and considering all your 
thoughts and actions. 

Or again, regard all the creatures as so many 
windows through which the hidden God watches 
you, and says to you at times : " Ask, and ye 
shall receive. For whoso asketh receiveth ; and 
to him that knocketh, it shall be opened." 



// 



f 



230 OF KEEPING IN THE PRESENCE OF GOD 

You can also realise the Presence of God by 
meditating on the creatures; passing through 
the corporeal, raise your mind to God, Who 
gives them their existence, movement, and power 
to act 

Whenever you seek help from God by prayer, 
in any struggle or action, place yoiurself in the 
Presence of God in one of the ways above 
mentioned, and then pray and beseech Him to 
grant you aid and succour. 

And know this, O devout soul, that if you 
will become familiar with the Presence of God, 
you will gain victories and treasures without 
number. Amongst other things, you will learn 
to guard your movements, thoughts, words and 
actions, so that they may befit the Presence of 
God and the Life of His Son. And the Presence 
itself of God will impart to you strength to 
abide in His Presence. 

For if from the presence of and nearness to 
natural agents,'whose virtue is limited and finite, 
we bear away something of their qualities and 
virtues, what shall be said of the Presence of 
God, Whose virtue is infinite, and power of 
shedding it abroad unspeakable ? 

Besides the way of praying spoken of above 
— " O God, make speed to save : O Lord, make 
haste to help me," — which is suitable for every 
need, you may also pray in another way by making 



\ 



1 



SOME ADVICE ABOUT PR A YER 23 1 

some particular request. Thus, if you desire to 
know and do the Will of God, your prayer might 
take the following form : " Blessed art Thou, O 
Lord ; O teach me Thy statutes. Lead me, O 
Lord, in the path of Thy commandments. O 
that my ways were made so direct that I might 
keep Thy statutes !" 

And to ask of God all that you can ask, and 
what He wills we should ask of Him, use the 
Lord's Prayer, which should be said with the 
whole affection of the heart, and with all atten- 
tion. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

^omc aubicc aljout JSrapet. 

I WOULD first advise you to make prayers (I 
do not now speak of meditation, of which 
I shall treat presently) short, in the way above 
spoken of, but frequent, full of desire and of 
actual faith in the help of God, which He will 
give, not in your way and at your time, but more 
effectually, and at a more fitting opportunity. 

Secondly, always let your prayers be accom- 
panied, either actually or virtually, with one of 
the following little clauses : " Of Thy Goodness." 
"According to Thy promises." "For Thy 



^ 



7 



23 2 SOAfE ADVICE ABOUT PRA YER 

Honour." " In the Name of Thy dearly-beloved 
Son/' " By the virtue of Thy Passion." "In 
remembrance of the Virgin Mary, Thy daughter, 
spouse and Mother." 

Thirdly, let them at times be united with 
ejaculations, such as : " Grant me, O Lord, Thy 
love, in the Name of Thy dearly-beloved Son." 
"And when will it be, my Lord, that I shall have 
it? when?" You may do this also after each 
separate petition, or after the whole of it, in this 
way: "Our Father, Which art in Heaven, 
hallowed be Thy Name. But, O Heavenly 
Father, our Father, when shall Thy Name be 
known, honoured, and glorified by all the world ? 
When, my God? when?'* And so after all the 
other petitions. 

Fourthly, when seeking any virtue or grace, it 
would be well to consider the value of the virtue, 
and the need you have of it, the Greatness of 
God and of His Goodness, and what the deserts 
of him who asks. This will lead you to pray 
with stronger affections and desires, with greater 
reverence and confidence, and with more 
humility. And, finally, you must consider the 
end for which you seek the virtue, that it may 
be to please and honour God. 



\ 



OF ANOTHER WAY OF PRAYER 233 

CHAPTER XIV. 

SDf anotf)et SffiTap of Ptapinof. 

ANOTHER most perfect way of praying is, 
by placing one's self in the Presence of 
God by an effort of thought, without any words, 
darting towards Him now and then a sigh, turn- 
ing our eyes towards Him with a heart full of 
desires to please Him, and with a swift and 
ardent desire that He would help us to love 
Him simply, to honour, and serve Him; or 
else, with the desire that He would grant us the 
grace which we had sought from Him in our 
previous prayers. 

CHAPTER XV. 

fl)f t!)e JTourf^) aiu of tlje l^uman miU. 

THE fourth succour of our will is Divine 
Love, which so aids and fortifies it, that 
there is nothing which it cannot do, and no 
passion or temptation which it cannot overcome. 
The way to obtain it is by praying for it, and 
frequently seeking it from God ; and by medita- 
tion — meditating on those points, which are 
calculated, by the grace of God, to inflame it in 



/ 



234 OF THE BEING OF GOD 

the earthly and human heart, which are these : 
Who is God. What and how great is His 
Power, His Wisdom, Goodness; what the Di- 
vine Beauty. What God has done for man: 
and what, if necessary. He would yet do. . Wjth 
what dispositions He did it What He do^s 
every day for man. What He will do for mail 
hereafter in another life, if whilst he now lives 
he obeys His precepts for the sake of pleasing 
Him, and with simplicity of mind. 



CHAPTER XVI. • 

9Df (^eTiitation on t\t Being: of ^ou. 

WHAT God is. He Himself, Who has 
perfect knowledge of Himself, has told 
us, when He answered and said : " I Am that I 
Am." 

And this which is here declared concerning 
God, may not be attributed to any creature; 
neither to Princes, nor Kings, nor Emperors, 
neither to Angels, nor to the whole world when 
taken together; because every thing has its 
being dependent upon God, and is in itself 
simply nothing. 

And from this appears the vanity of man's 
love for creatures, and of his attachment for 



\ 



OP THE POWER OF GOD 235 

them, when he should love the Creator in them, 
and the creatures only according to the will of 
his Lord; his love is vain, because he loves 
vanities. It is vain, because he thinks to satisfy 
himself with those things which are nothing in 
themselves. It is vain, because he wearies 
himself to possess those things which, when 
they are obtained, rob and slay their possessors. 
If then you would love as you ought to love, 
love God, Who fills and satisfies the heart. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

SDf (^enitation on t()c Potoer of (Bon. 

WE know that, if not this or that power 
only, but all the powers of the world 
were combined together, and wished to build, not 
a kingdom nor a city, but only a palace, they would 
need various materials, and workmen, and a long 
space of time ; nor then would the building be 
entirely in accordance with their wishes. 

But God, by His Power, created in a moment 
the whole universe out of nothing, and with the 
same facility could create countless worlds, 
destroy them, and reduce them to nothing. 

The more profoundly we meditate on this 
point, and continue to do so, the more shall we 



7 




7 



236 OF THE WISDOM OF GOD 

find out fresh grounds for wonder, and fresh 
incentives to love so powerful a Lord. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

©f (59fBitation on tl^e CHisitiom of ©on. 

THE Wisdom of God is too deep and un- 
searchable for us to be able to compre- 
hend it. Yet that you may have some idea of it, 
turn your eyes to the stars above, the beauty of 
earth, and of all the universe ; and you will find 
nothing but the expression of the incompre- 
hensible Wisdom of the Divine Architect. Turn 
your thoughts to the life of man, and to the 
various accidents which happen, and nothing 
will be discovered so disordered but that in 
the sight of God it will be unsearchable wis- 
dom. 

Meditate on the Mysteries of Redemption, for 
you will find that they are full of the profoundest 
wisdom. " Oh, the depth of the riches, both of 
the wisdom and the knowledge of God! how 
unsearchable are His judgments ! " 



\ 



OF THE GOODNESS OF GOD 237 



CHAPTER XIX. 

®f ^eUitation on tfjc ®ootinej5$ of ®oD. 

THE Goodness of God, like every one of 
His Infinite Perfections, is in itself in- 
comprehensible ; but so great is it in its outward 
manifestations, that there is no created thing in 
which it is not found. Creation is an effect of 
the Goodness of God. The preservation and 
government of the world is also an effect of the 
Goodness of God. Our Redemption is an evi- 
dence to us of the unspeakable greatness of the 
Goodness of God, Who for our ransom gave His 
Only-begotten Son, and still gives Him to us for 
our daily food in the Sacrament of the Altar. 

CHAPTER XX. 

2Df ©euitatioti on t\t "Beautp of ®oD. 

CONCERNING the Beauty of God it 
should be enough for us to know that 
it is such and so great, that God Himself, from 
all eternity contemplating it without ever turning 
aside from it, remains in His Infinite Capacity 
incomprehensibly satisfied and blessed. 

O man, know now the dignity to which the 



7 




238 WHA T GOD HAS DONE FOR MAN 

Goodness of God calls you, and be no more so 
dull of heart as to despise it, giving your love to 
vanity, lies, and shadows. 

God calls you to the love of His Power, 
Wisdom, and Goodness, to be charmed with His 
Beauty, and to enter into His joy; and do you- 
turn a deaf ear? Think, think upon what you 
are doing, lest the hour come upon you when 
repentance shall be unavailing. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

CHljat ^oB 1)80 Bone for ^an, anti toft^'tal^at JLofte; 
anu tol^at i^e tooulti l\xti\zx no for l^hn, if neeBful. 

WHAT God has done to man, and for man, 
may be seen by meditating on Creation 
and Redemption. 

But the Love with which He made him and 
wrought out his salvation was more than infinite. 

Infinite had been the price of the ransom, but 
the Love yet more ; for had there been neces- 
sity. He would willingly have suffered more, and 
died many times. 

If then for your ransom you owe your whole 
being over and over again, to what extent 
are you indebted to that Love of God towards 
you, which exceeds and outstrips the ransom 
itself? 



1 



WHA T GOD DOES EVER V DAY FOR MAN 239 



CHAPTER XXII. 

CH^at ©oD tioe0 etierp 2)ap for ^an. 

THERE is not a day, nor a moment, in 
which man does not receive from God 
some fresh benefit; for every day and every 
moment God creates him by preserving him in 
being. Every moment God ministers to him 
through His creatures, through heaven, air, earth, 
sea, and all things therein. 

Every day He gives him His grace, calling 
him from evil to good, guarding him from sin, 
and when he has sinned, helping him that he 
may sin no more. He waits for him, calls him 
to repentance, and when he comes to Him, is 
more ready to forgive than he to desire forgive- 
ness. Every day He sends him His Son, with 
all the riches of the Mysteries of the Cross, 
rendering Him ever present with him in the 
Sacrament of the Altar. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 



// 



lS)cto great 10 t!)e ©oonnc^jsi of our ®oTj m toaftinff 
for anti bearing; toftt) t\\t dinner. 



T 



O know the greatness of the Goodness of 
our God in supporting the sinner, con- 




240 WHAT GOD WILL DO IN ANOTHER LIFE 

sider first, that as God loves holiness unutter- 
ably, so His hatred, on the other hand, of sin is 
infinite. 

What Goodness, then, does God show in sup- 
porting the sinner, who before the eyes of His 
Purity and Majesty commits many sins, not 
once, nor twice, nor thrice, but over and over 
again. "I see well, O Lord (may the sinner 
say), that when I have sinned you have said to 
my heart : We will see which of the two will 
prevail, you in offending Me, or I in pardoning 
you." 

This point well meditated upon, will, I believe, 
with the grace of God, inflame the heart of the 
sinner, and make him quickly turn to God; 
but if not, he will have great reason to fear the 
unsearchable judgments of God, from which 
oftentimes proceed blows of vengeance, sudden, 
tremendous and irremediable. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

CnK;at ©ou toill Do in anotljet Jlife, not onip for Tjim 
tot)o M^ altoap0 jgertjen i&im, but aliaio for tl^e 
contjertcu dinner. 

THE favours and the bliss which are received 
from God in the Heavenly Country are 
such, and so great, that here they cannot be 



J 



WHAT GOD WILL DO IN" ANOTHER LIFE 24 1 

conceived, nor can we clearly and adequately 
desire them. 

Who shall ever attain to the full knowledge 
of what it is for a man to sit down at the table 
of God, God ministering to him and giving him 
the food of His Own Beatitude? 

Who can imagine what it is for the souls of 
the blessed to enter into the joy of their Lord? 

And who can ever comprehend the love and 
honour which God shows to His citizens, of 
which St. Thomas speaks in one of his works 
thus — "The Almighty God to each of His 
Angels, and to holy souls, subjects Himself to 
such a degree as to become, so to speak, the 
hired servant of each, and as if each of them 
were His God?" 

O Lord I O Lord ! he who often enters into a 
profound consideration of Thy dealings with 
Thy creatures, finds Thee so inebriated with 
love that it appears to him that Thy Beatitude 
consists in loving, in doing them good, and 
feeding them with Thyself. O Lord, so impress 
this consideration upon us, that we may love 
Thee, and loving Thee, may be made one with 
Thee by a loving union. 

O human heart, whither dost thou run? — 
after a shadow? — after the wind? — after nothing? 
leaving that which is All, Almightiness, Highest 
Wisdom, Unspeakable Goodness, Uncreated 



// 



242 OF THE HUMAN WILL 

Beauty, Supreme Good, and the Infinite Sea of 
all Perfections ? He runs after you, calling you 
with many, many a strong cry, with new bless- 
ings, as well as by those already received. 

Do you know from whence your so great 
misery arises ? It is because you do not pray ; 
it is because you do not meditate. Therefore, 
being without light, and without heat, it is no 
wonder that you cannot turn yourself from the 
works of darkness. Enter, enter now, O soul, 
O lukewarm Religious, into the school of medi- 
tation and prayer of which we have been speak- 
ing ; and in it you will learn by experience tliat 
it is the true study of a Christian and of a 
Religious to endeavour to deny self-will, so as 
to do the Will of God, and to hate self, so as to 
love God. All other studies without this (though 
of all the sciences put together) are nothing else 
but the fuel of presumption and of pride, and 
the more they enlighten the understanding, the 
more they darken the will, to the ruin of the 
souls of those who make them their pursuit 



CHAPTER XXV, 

SDf t!)e jTiftT) Support of tlje ij)uman GEtiU. 

THE hatred of ourselves is a necessary aid 
to th^ human will, for without it you will 



T 



> 



OF SELF-LOVE 2 43 



never attain the aid of Divine Love, the Source 
of all good. 

The way to gain it is, first to seek it from 
God ; and then to reflect upon the many injuries 
which are, and have been, brought upon man 
by self-love. 

This self-love is of so malignant a nature, 
that if it could enter into heaven, it would 
suddenly convert the Heavenly Jerusalem into 
a Babylon. Consider then what this pest 
works in the human breast, and in this present 
life! 

Take self-love out of the world, and im- 
mediately the gates of hell would close. Who 
then would be such an enemy to himself, as, 
when he has considered the nature, qualities, and 
effects of self-love, not to be indignant against 
it, and to hate it? 

CHAPTER XXVI. 
3fn tol}at CBJap ^elMotjt map be uf^totoereU. 

THAT you may ascertain how wide and 
extensive is the reign of self-love within 
you, frequently turn to consider which of the 
passions of the soul it is which most often leads 
your will, for it will be found not to stand alone- 
Having discovered :then the. movement'^ of 




2 44 OF SELF-LOVE 



love or desire, of joy or grief, then consider 
well whether the object loved or desired is a 
virtuous one, and in accordance with the com- 
mandments of God ; and do the same with joy 
or sorrow, see whether the things which produce 
those effects are such as God would have us feel 
joy or sorrow for ; or whether all springs from 
the world and from attachment to the creatures, 
which is shown by being occupied with them 
more than is necessary or requisite, or than 
God wills. If this be so, it is evident that 
self-love reigns in your will, and is the ruling 
principle of all. 

But if your will be busied and occupied with 
virtues, and things which God wills, you must 
still consider whether it is directed to those 
objects by the impulse of the Divine Will, or by 
some liking of its own or caprice ; for it often 
happens, that a man, actuated by some caprice 
or liking of his own, gives himself to various 
good works, such as prayers, fastings, com- 
munions, and other holy occupations. 

This may be proved in two ways: — first, if 
the will does not accept all opportunities of 
doing good which present themselves, indiffer- 
ently ; secondly, if when some hindrance arises, 
it gives way to grief, vexation and disquietude ; 
or when, on the other hand, it succeeds, if it 
yields to self-complacency and satisfaction. 



T 



\ 



OF SELF-LOVE 



245 



If the will be moved by God, besides what 
has been said above, you must further consider 
to what end its actions are mostly directed. 
For if the end be simply to please God, so far 
it is well, yet even then a man may not feel 
quite secure; self-love is so subtle, and hides 
itself beneath good works and acts of virtue. 

When this most cruel monster, self-love, shows 
itself openly, we must pursue it with all hatred 
even to death; — in little things too, and not 
only in great. 

We should always be suspicious of its con- 
cealment. Therefore, after every good work, 
humble yourself, smite upon your breast, pray- 
ing God to pardon you, and to keep you from 
self-love. 

It will be well, therefore, early in the morning 
to turn to the Lord, and to protest to Him that 
you intend not to offend Him any more, and 
particularly on that day, but in all things ever to 
do His Divine Will, and for the sake of pleasing 
Him. 

For this purpose often turn to God in prayer, 
and ask Him continually that He would protect 
you with His Hand, and enable you to do such 
things as please Him, and in the way that pleases 
Him. 



// 



246 OF THE SIXTH AID 



CHAPTER XXVII. 
S)f tlje ^'\ix\ aio. 

THE practice of being present during the 
offering of the Holy Sacrifice is the sixth 
help of the human will ; — Communion also, and 
Confession. Since the grace of God is the 
principal and necessary succour of our will, so 
as to guard it from evil and direct it to good, it 
cannot but follow that every thing by which we 
gain an increase of grace is a support to the will. 

To gain an increase of grace by being present 
at the Holy Mysteries, you should attend in the 
following manner. 

In the first part (for there are three parts in 
the Celebration), which extends from the Introit 
to the Offertory, strive to excite in yourself a 
great desire, that, as the Son of God came down 
from Heaven, and was bom in the world, in 
order to send upon the earth the fire of His Love, 
so He would deign to come and be bom by His 
own power in your inmost heart, that it may 
bum, and have no other thought but that of 
pleasing Him at all times, as long as you live, 
and evermore. 

When the priest is saying the prayers, with 
burning desire ask, O needy soul, for yourself 



J 



\ 



OF THE SIXTH AID 247 

the same graces. And when he commences the 
Epistle and Gospel, pray mentally to God for 
the understanding and the power to know their 
meaning, and to observe all that they enjoin. 

In the second part, which extenas from the 
Offertory to the Communion, withdraw yourself 
entirely from all attachment to, or thought of, 
the creatures or of self, and offer yourself wholly 
to God— to do all His Will. 

Immediately after the Consecration, at the 
Elevation, adore the true Body and Blood of 
Christ, together with His whole Divinity. Con- 
template Him hidden beneath the elements of 
bread and wine ; render to Him loving thanks 
that every day He vouchsafes to come to us with 
the precious fruits of the tree of His Cross ; and 
with the same offering, and with the same inten- 
tions with which, transfixed upon the Cross, He 
made that offering to His Heavenly Father, you 
also offer to the Same Father. 

When the priest receives the Holy Sacrament, 
then you make your spiritual communion, open- 
ing your heart to your Lord, having closed it to 
all creatures, that He may inflame it with the 
fire of His Love. 

In the third part to the end, together with the 
priest, he with his mouth, you with your heart, 
seek what is asked for in the prayers after 
Communion. 



"^ 



I 



i 



248 OF SACRAMENTAL COMMUNION 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

Of Sacramental Communion. 

IN order to receive a great increase of grace 
by Communicating, you must have very 
holy dispositions; and as we cannot of our- 
selves have holy dispositions, the following prayer 
should be said with great devotion ; — '* Cleanse, 
O Lord, we beseech Thee, our consciences, by 
Thy visitation, that Thy Son, our Lord Jesus 
Christ, at His Coming with all His Saints, may 
find in us a mansion fitted for His Presence, 
Who with Thee and the Holy Ghost liveth and 
reigneth. One God, world without end. Amen." 
But that we may not be wanting on our part 
to co-operate with the Divine help, your prepara- 
tion should consist in considering first for what 
purpose Christ instituted the most Holy Sacra- 
ment of the Altar. Then, finding that it was for 
the sake of reminding us of the love which He 
displayed for us in the Mysteries of the Cross, 
consider next, why it is He wishes us to remem- 
ber it. The end being that we should love and 
obey Him, our best preparation will be a desire 
and burning wish to obey and love Him, griev- 
ing for the past, when we have not loved but 
offended Him. And with this desire and 



// 



OF SACRAMENTAL CONFESSION 249 

inflamed wish to love Him, we must prepare 
ourselves until the time of Communion. 

When the time for communicating has arrived, 
rekindle your faith in the Presence of the Lamb 
of God beneath the elements of bread and wine; 
make an act of profound adoration, beseech 
Him to remove from your heart all hidden sin, 
and every stain, and receive Him with the hope 
that He will give you His Love. 

When you have received and brought Him 
into your heart, ask Him again and again for 
His Love, and for every other gift you need in 
order to please Him. After that, offer Him to 
your Heavenly Father, as a sacrifice of praise 
for the boundless love which He has shown to 
us in this and in all other blessings of Redemp- 
tion, and that you may gain His Love, and in 
behalf of the living and the dead. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

®f %arramenta( Cotifes^ion. 

CONFESSION, to be made as it ought to be, 
has need of many things. The first of 
these is an exact examination of conscience on 
the commandments of God, and the duties of 
our state. And having found out your sins, 




250 OF SA CRAMENTAL CONFESSION 

though they be but little sins, mourn over them 
bitterly ; view them in relation to the Majesty of 
God, and as acts of human ingratitude against 
Divine Goodness and Love. Therefore blame 
and condemn yourself in these words — " Is this 
the return you make to the Lord, O foolish and 
unwise ? Is He not thy Father, to Whom you 
belong, Who made you and created you ?" 

And renewing again and again the ardent 
desire that you had never offended God, say, 
— " Oh, that I had never offended Thee, my 
Creator, my Heavenly Father, my Redeemer, 
and had rather suffered all other evils !" 

Then turn to God, with deep confusion, and 
faith that He will forgive you, say with your 
whole heart, — " Father, I have sinned against 
Heaven and before Thee, and am no more 
worthy to be called Thy son : make me as one 
of Thy hired servants." 

And renewing again your sorrow for having 
offended God, with the resolve rather to suffer 
any pain than wilfully to offend Him again, 
confess your sins to your confessor with shame 
and grief, precisely as you committed them, 
without excusing yourself, or accusing any one 
else. 

After confession, give thanks to God, that, 
although you had so many, many times offended 
Him, He is ever more ready to forgive than the 



7 



A 



OF IMPURE PA SSION 2 5 1 

sinner to receive forgiveness. And in this, find- 
ing a fresh ground for sorrow for having offended 
so kind a Father, resolve, with more purpose 
than ever, that you will never offend Him any 
more, with His help, in company with the Blessed 
Virgin, your Guardian Angel, and any Saint in 
particular, or patron. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

Ipoto to obetcome tlje 3[mpurc pa00ion. 

EVERY other passion is overcome by being 
faced and resisted, even though we receive 
a wound in the attack, and by challenging it anew 
to the battle, till we master every movement of 
it, both great and small. But this shameful 
passion must not only not be provoked, but 
every possible incentive to it must be removed 
out of the way. 

The temptation of the flesh is conquered and 
the impure passion mortified by flight, and not 
by an encounter face to face. 

A regular life, sincere intentions, past trials 
and victories, relationships, meanness or ugli- 
ness in appearance, which do not threaten 
danger, and whatever else may seem to betoken 
security, are not sufficient grounds for not taking 



7 



252 OF IMPURE PASSION 

flight. Fly, fly, beloved soul, if you would not 
be taken captive. 

And if there are some, who have spent all 
their life in the presence of most dangerous occa- 
sions, without falling, that is no encouragement 
to you, but arises from the judgments of God ; 
besides, when the falls are not seen, the over- 
throw of the soul is often the greatest Fly, 
and obey the advice and examples which (jod 
gives you in Holy Scripture, in the lives of so 
many great saints, and every day in this or that 
person. 

Fly, fly, without looking behind you to see 
or remember from what object you are flying ; 
for here too there is the danger of returning 
to it 

And if there is necessary intercourse, let your 
words be few and brief, and rather brusque than 
gracious : for in this you may be caught, and there 
is danger of flame and fire. Here the maxim 
holds good, " Use medicine or ever thou be sick." 
Do not wait until you are ill, but fly betimes ; 
for this is the only safe medicine. 

But if unfortunately the sickness overtakes 
you, your whole safety depends upon your in- 
stantly checking the first symptoms, which is — to 
use the expression of the Spirit — the taking and 
dashing the little ones against the stones ; then 
hasten to your confessor, hide not from him the 



7 



\ 



OF THE VICE OF IMPURITY 253 

slightest venial sin of this passion, for if you hide 
it, it will grow up and become great. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

!&oUj manp t?)nt0:0 0l^oulu be ^tjoiuen, iso a? not to 
falf into tl)c Slice of Sfmpiititp. 

I'^HERE are many things from which we 
must flee if we would not have our 
wings caught in the bird-lime of this shameful 
passion. The first and principal flight is from 
persons who are manifestly dangerous. The 
second, from others also as much as possible. 
The third, from visits, negotiations, presents, 
friendships, even though distant, for it is easier 
for that which is at first distant to become 
intimate, than for that which is once intimate to 
be made distant again. The fourth flight is from 
entering into discourse about this passion, from 
music, songs, and books of doubtful morality. 
The fifth flight (which is one but little known, 
made account of, or put into practice) is from all 
delight in created things, such as clothes, various 
articles of furniture which minister to ease and 
comfort, kinds of food and other indulgences, 
which if they are for the most part in them- 
selves lawful, yet they accustom the heart of 



1 



1 



254 OF THE SIX OF IMPURITY 

man to pleasure, and keep up a craving for 

pleasure. 

Thus, when an unlawfiil pleasure offers itself 
(which by its nature quickly makes a wound, 
and pierces to the very marrow of the bones), 
the heart finds it difficult to reject it, because at 
other times it has not been in the habit <rf 
mortification. 

On the other hand, hearts accustomed to turn 
away fi-om lawful gratifications, when unlawfiil 
and shamefiil ones present themselves, flee from 
them with the greatest ease, shrinking firom their 
very name as well as firom themselves. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

tJJljat U)e 0l)oulD DO UjT)en toe ^abc jFaUen into t\'\^ 
^iit of Slmpuritp. 

IF through misfortune, or wilfulness, you have 
fallen into this sin of the flesh, the remedy 
(lest you add sin to sin) is to have recourse with 
all possible speed, without any further examina- 
tion of conscience, to confession ; and putting 
aside all human prudence, speak frankly, and 
lay bare all your disease, taking whatever medi- 
cine and counsel may be given you, however 
bitter or painful it may seem to you. 



1 



// 



MOTIVES FOR TURNING TO GOD 255 

Delay not, though a hundred, nay, a thousand 
reasons for delay may suggest themselves; for 
if you delay, you will fall again, and the second 
fall will produce further delays ; so that delays 
causing relapses, and relapses fresh delays, 
before you have confessed and forsaken your 
sins, years will have elapsed. 

In conclusion, then, to avoid this shameful 
sin, I advise you once more to fly, if you would 
not fall. 

And if thoughts come into your mind, no 
matter how slight they may be, regard them 
seriously, and fly from them no less than from 
the greater. And though from your quickness 
in resisting them, you are quite clear that they 
are light sins, still confess them, and reveal your 
enemy to your confessor. 

And if you have fallen, go at once to confes- 
sion, and do not let shame hinder you from 
doing so. 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

0f 0ome ®otitje0 toT)fcl) g^duft teat t\)t dinner to 
rum to (5oD iriitfjout ncTap. 

THE first motive which ought to induce the 
. sinner to return to God is, the considera- 




256 MOTIVES FOR TURNING TO GOD 

tion of God Himselfi Whom, as He is the 
Supreme Good — Supreme Power, Wisdom, and 
Goodness — man should never have dared to 
offend. Not only because it is prudent, for it 
is an evil choice for a man to dispute with 
Almightiness, and with the Supreme Judge Who 
has to judge him ; nor simply because of jus- 
tice and fitness, for it is not to be tolerated that 
a mere nothing, a little dust, a creature, should 
offend his Creator ; a servant, his Lord ; the 
benefited, the Benefactor ; the son, the Father. 

The second motive is, the great obligation of 
the sinner to return at once to his Father's 
house ; seeing that the conversion of the son, 
and his return to the house, honours the Father 
and gladdens all the household, and the neigh- 
bours, and the Angels of Heaven. 

For as the son, at first, by sinning, offended 
and vexed the Father, so by returning, with 
bitter tears for his offence, and with full purpose 
of will to obey Him henceforth in all His com- 
mands and desires, he honours and rejoices his 
Father, and so touches His heart and moves 
Him to pity, that He is not content to wait for 
him longingly, but runs towards him, falls on 
his neck, kisses him, and clothes him with His 
grace, and His other gifts. 

The third motive is, self-interest; for every 
sinner has to consider that if he turn not in 



7 



\ 



MOTIVES FOR TURNING TO GOD 



257 



time, the winter and sabbath-day are certainly 
approaching, and he will fall for ever into the 
pains of Hell. But were there no other pain than 
the infinite increase of those passions which hold 
him in the bondage of sin, without the hope of 
being once able to dip the tip of his finger in 
those waters in which he delights, this ought to 
be sufficient to terrify him. 

Nor is there any ground for confidence in the 
intention to turn to God at the end of life, or 
after some months or years ; since such a pro- 
posal is madness and extreme impiety. It is a 
sign of a weak head to propose to cope with a 
great difficulty at the very time when a man has 
the least strength. 

The sinner, as he continues in sin, has less 
power to turn to God every day, both because 
of the evil habit which gradually becomes natural 
to him, and from an increasing indisposition for 
receiving the grace of conversion ; also, by dis- 
daining God through the great impiety of cleav- 
ing as long as possible to the creature, and then 
at the last gasp, or at least late in life, giving 
himself to God, out of self interest, he forfeits 
the help which he will stand in need of in that 
hour. 

Again, such an idea and intention befit a 
madman, for, even granting that he will be 
capable of conversion and have effectual grace, 



7 



\ 



258 OF OBTAINING CONVERSION 

what security has he, or can he have, that he 
will not die suddenly and without the power ot 
speech, as has happened, and does happen con- 
tinually ? 

Cry, cry, O sinner, to the Lord, even while 
you are reading, and say — "Turn me, and I 
shall be turned, for Thou art my Lord God." 
And do not cease, until you are converted to 
your Lord and Father, mourning exceedingly 
over your offences against Him, and accepting 
with resignation whatever by way of satisfaction 
He may be pleased to require of you. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

l&oU) x\s olitain t\t ©ift of Cfatief for our ©fFcnceiS 
agatn^t ©ou, antt Conbcr^ton. 

THE best way to get the gift of tears for our 
offences against God, is to meditate upon 
the greatness of the Goodness of God, and of 
His Love, which He has shown towards man. 
For whoever considers that by sinning, he has 
offended the Supreme Good and ineffable Good- 
ness, Who is ever doing good, and has never 
done any thing else but good, pouring down 
His graces, and shedding His light upon friends 
and enemies; and that he has offended Him 



7 



\ 



OF OBTAINING CONVERSION 259 

for a mere nothing, for a trifle, for some little 
false pleasure, cannot but weep bitteriy. 

Place yourself then before the image of the 
Crucified, and imagine that He is saying to you 
— " Look upon Me, consider one by one My 
Wounds, and that your sins have caused Me to 
be in this state in which you behold Me, wounded 
and ill-treated. And yet I am your God, your 
Creator, your loving Lord, and Merciful Father. 
Return, then, to Me with tears of sincere sorrow, 
and with the burning wish that you had never 
offended Me, and with the full will of readily 
bearing any pain rather than offend Me again." 

Then, picturing Christ before you, with the 
crown of thorns on His Head, and with the reed 
in His Hand, and covered with wounds, imagine 
that He says to you : " Behold the Man." Be- 
hold the Man, Who loves you with unspeakable 
love, and has redeemed you by these insults, 
these Wounds, and this Blood — "Behold the 
Man." This Man is the One Whom you have of- 
fended, after He has bestowed upon you so much 
love, after so many benefits — " Behold the Man." 
This Man is the Mercy of God and plenteous 
Redemption. This Man offers Himself for 
you every hour and every moment to the Father. 
This Man, sitting on the Right Hand of the 
Father, makes intercession for you, and is your 
Advocate. 




26o OF LIVING WITHOUT GOD 

"Why, then, do you offend Me? why not 
return to Me?" "Return to Me, for I have 
blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgression, 
and as a cloud, thy sins." 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

©f 0ome I3,ea0on0 tol)p f^en (ibe toitl}oiit tCTefpfng 
for tt;eir ©ffenrejei a0:ain0t (?otJ, U)it!)out Clirtuetf, 
anu toitljout C!)ri0tian perfection. 

THE reasons why man sleeps on in luke- 
warmness, and neither rises out of sin, 
nor advances in virtues as he ought, are many : 
the following are some of them. 

Because man does not dwell within himself, 
to see what goes on in his inner house, and 
who is its owner; but with a wandering and 
curious mind wastes his days in pastimes of 
vanity. And even if he is occupied with things 
which are lawful and good in themselves, and 
with such as concern virtues and Christian per- 
fection, he does not give his mind to them. 

And if at times he thinks and becomes con- 
scious of his need, and is called and moved by 
God to change his life, he answers, "To-morrow, 
to-morrow"; "By and by, by and by." But 
neither "to-day" nor "now" ever arrive; for 
through this vice of procrastination and delay, 



1 



OF LIVING WITHOUT GOD 26 1 

each " to-day " brings forth a new " to-morrow," 
and each " now " a new " by and by." 

Nor are there wanting those who, believing 
that a change of life consists in certain devotions, 
spend all the day in reciting " Our Father," &c., 
without ever setting to work to mortify their 
disorderly passions, which cause them to cleave 
to creatures. 

Others give themselves to exercises of virtue, 
but build without having laid their foundation, 
for every virtue has its proper foundation. Thus, 
humility has its foundation in the desire to be 
but little or nothing accounted of, to be despised 
by others, and to be vile in its own sight; 
therefore he who first lays this foundation, after- 
wards gladly accepts the stones of the building 
of humility. Then, increasing in the desire to 
be despised, and willingly receiving slights from 
others, he goes on acquiring humility; above 
all, often seeking it from God by virtue of the 
Humiliation of His Son. 

And yet all this may be done by some, without 
either love of the virtue, or desire to please God. 
Here arises a want of consistency in the exhibi- 
tion of this virtue ; such persons to some are 
humble, to others are proud ; humble to some, 
but proud to those whose esteem is of no impor- 
tance to their designs. 

There are others who desire Christian perfec- 



7 



\ 



2(>2 OP LIVING WITHOUT GOD 



tion^ but seek it in their own strength, which is 
rery feeble^ by their own industry and ezercisesy 
and not from God, in distrust of themsehres, and 
so they go backward rather than forward. 

Again, there are those who have bat jost 
entered on the path of holiness, who persuade 
themselves that they have at once attained per- 
fection, and so, having become vain in them- 
selves, their virtues become vain also. 

If then you would acquire Christian virtue 
and perfection, you must first distrust yourself, 
then trust in God, and strive to kindle in your- 
self the desire, as much as possible, of advance- 
ment day by day. 

Watch also, so that no opportunity, whether 
it be great or small, of exercising a virtue be 
lost ; and if you have missed some occasion of 
the kind, inflict on yourself some punishment, 
and do not suffer it to pass without chastisement 

And however far you may have advanced 
towards perfection, regard yourself day by day 
as one who is beginning, and study to perform 
every act with as much care, as if on it alone all 
perfection depended, and so with the second, 
the third, and all following actions. 

Guard yourself against little faults as carefully, 
as diligent persons guard themselves against 
great ones. 

Embrace virtue for virtue's sake, and for the 



/ 



\ 



OF LOVE TOWARDS ENEMIES 263 

sake of pleasing God, and then you will be the 
same, whether you are alone or in the presence of 
others. And you will learn in this way sometimes 
to leave a virtue for a virtue, and God for God. 
Do not swerve to the right hand nor to the left, 
neither turn back. Be discreet; love to be 
alone, to meditate and pray, beseeching God 
continually that He will grant you the virtue 
and perfection for which you are seeking, since 
God Himself is the Fountain of all virtues, 
and of the perfection to which He hourly 
calls us. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

Of ILotje totoarus (StiemfcB. 

ALTHOUGH Christian perfection consists 
in perfect obedience to the command- 
ments of God, nevertheless it chiefly proceeds 
from the love of our enemies ; so greatly does 
this precept resemble the ways of God. 

If then you wish to attain to perfection by a 
short road, strive very accurately to observe the 
command of Christ, which He gives in the pre- 
cept to love our enemies ; love, do good to, and 
pray for, them, not stiffly and coldly, but with 
such affection, that your heart, as it were, for- 



'^ 



I 



i 



264 OP LOVE TOWARDS ENEMIES 

getting yourself, should be wholly given up to 
loving them and praying for them. 

Do them good then ; be very careful that in 
every thing that affects the soul they receive no 
injury from you, but manifest to them by every 
gesture, word and deed, that you love and value 
them, and are always at their service. 

With reference to temporal benefits, you must 
be guided in what you do by prudence and 
judgment, having consideration for the nature 
of your enemies, your own condition, and cir- j 
cumstances. \ 

If you follow this advice, holiness and peace j 
will enter into your heart in great abundance. 1 

Nor is this precept so difficult to keep as some j 
imagine. No doubt it is hard to nature, but to 1 
him who is desirous and ever anxious to subdue i 
each movement of nature or malice that arises 
within him, it will become easy, bringing with it 
an inner spring of sweet peace and readiness. 
However, to help your weakness, there are four 
most powerful aids to which you may resort. 

One is prayer ; — frequently to beseech Christ 
to give you this love, by virtue of His Love, Who, 
whilst hanging on the Cross, thought first of the 
good of His enemies, then of His Mother, lastly 
of Himself. 

The second aid is to remind yourself of the 
precept, saying to yourself, "It is the Lord's 



I \ 



OF EXAMINA TION OF CONSCIENCE 26$ 

command that I should love my enemies, there- 
fore I must do so." 

The third aid is to behold in your enemies 
the living image of God, Who at their creation 
gave it to them, and thus to excite your love and 
esteem for it 

The fourth, to regard further the ineffable 
ransom wherewith Christ redeemed them, not 
with silver and gold, but with His Own Blood, 
and so exert yourself that it be not shed in vain, 
lost, and trodden under foot 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

€)f (2&tamtnation of Consricncf. 

EXAMINATION of conscience by diligent 
persons is usually made three times a 
day ; before dinner, before vespers, and before 
going to bed. But if this cannot be done by 
some one, at least let him not neglect the exam- 
ination in the evening. If God twice looked 
upon the works He had done for man, shall not 
man look more than once upon what he does 
for God, and for which he will moreover have 
to render to Him a strict account ? 

The examination should be made in the 
following way. First, seek light from God that 



/ 



^ 



266 OF EXAMINA TION OF CONSCIENCE 

you may know the state of your inner life and 
your works. Secondly, you will begin to consider 
how far your heart has been enclosed, and how 
you have kept the spirit of recollection. Thirdly, 
how you have during that day obeyed God, on 
all the occasions which He has given you of 
serving Him. On this I will add no more ; for 
in this third consideration must be included the 
duties and obligations of each individual. 

Having thanked God for enabling you on any 
occasion to correspond with His grace, or to 
perform any good action, forget it altogether, 
retaining the desire to begin your course anew, 
as if you had hitherto accomplished nothing. 

Concerning failures, defects, and sins, turn to 
God, and, grieving over your offences, say to 
Him : " Lord, I have done this from what I am, 
nor should I have stopped where I did, had not 
Thy Right Hand come to my rescue ; for this I 
give Thee thanks. Now do Thou, I pray Thee, 
O my Lord, in the Name of Thy Beloved Son, 
from what Thou art. Pardon me, and give me 
grace, so that I may not offend Thee any more." 

And then, as a penance for your faults, and as 
a spur to amendment, mortify your will in some 
trifle which otherwise you would have allowed 
yourself, for this is well-pleasing to Him. I say 
the same of the body ; and do not neglect this 
and similar acts of penance, lest the examination 

/ V 



OF LIVING IN PEA CE 267 



// 



of conscience become a mere matter of routine, 
and fruitless in consequence of a slothful way of 
using it. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII, 

SDf €too Rilled for ILitiing- in Peace. 

ALTHOUGH he who lives according to 
what has been already laid down will 
abide continually in peace, I will in this last 
chapter give two rules, which are also included 
in what has been said, by keeping which, you will 
live as quiet as is possible in this wicked world. 

One is, to endeavour more and more to keep 
the door of your heart closed against desires, for 
desire is the long beam of the cross, and of 
anxiety, which will encumber you according to 
the greatness of the desire. And if the desires 
be for many things, the more will be the beams, 
which are prepared for many crosses. Then, 
when difficulties and obstacles in the way of the 
gratification of the desires ari^e, in these behold 
the other beam which forms the arms of the 
cross, to which is nailed the soul that yields to 
desires. 

Whoever then would not have the cross, let 
him not desire, and if he finds himself on the 



^ 



268 OF LIVING IN PEACE 

cross, let him give up the desire ; for as soon as 
he gives up the desire, he shall come down from 
the cross. It is the only remedy. 

The other rule is, that when you are vexed or 
offended by others, do not let the thought rest in 
your mind, neither give way to such consider- 
ations as these : " That they have no business to 
treat me like this; who are they, or what do they 
think of themselves, or the like," for all this is 
adding fuel to the fire of anger, indignation, and 
hatred. 

But have recourse at once in such cases to the 
Strength and Commands of God, in order that 
you may know what you ought to do, lest per- 
chance your error may be worse than theirs. 
For in this way you shall return into the path of 
virtue and peace. 

For if you cannot deal rightly with yourself, 
what marvel is it if others do not deal rightly 
with you ? 

And if you delight in taking vengeance on those 
who offend you, first you ought to take vengeance 
upon yourself, than whom you have not a greater 
enemy or offender. 



\ 



// 



OF INTERIOR PEACE 



OR 



Ciie pati) to jPacaDijse 



^ 



\ 



// 



CHAPTER L 

CKIjat 10 tlje Baturc of our }i5eart, aiiD Tjoiu tt oug:t)t 
to lie <5ot3frnri}. 

YOUR heart was created by God for this 
end alone, to be loved and possessed by 
Him. And with this love you can make it do 
whatever you wish, and every thing, however 
difficult it might be, will in this manner become 
easy to you ; therefore you must in the first place 
gain a fixed and established intention in your 
heart, so that outward actions may flow from 
inward. For, although corporal penances, and 
all those exercises which chastise and afflict the 
flesh, are praiseworthy, when used with discre- 
tion, and when adapted to the particular, circupi- 
stances of each person, yet, if you only Use siicK 
means as these, you will never gain a single virtue; 
but on the contrary vanity and the wind of vain- 
glory ; and all your labour will be lost, unless 
these outward exercises are animated and guided 
by right inward dispositions. 

The life of man is nothing else but a warfare 




272 OF A PEACEFUL SPIRIT 

and a continual temptation; and in consequence 
of this warfare, you must live in a state of watch- 
fulness, and ever keep a guard over your heart, 
so that it may continue in peace and quietness. 
And if you should feel the movement of some 
sensual disturbance within you, you must be 
careful to quiet it instantly, stilling your heart, 
and not permitting it to turn aside or wander 
after any of these things. Do this as often as 
any cause of disquietude presents itself, whether 
in prayer, or at any other time, and know that 
when you have learnt to act thus, then you will 
have learnt to pray aright ; but remember that 
all this must be done sweetly and gently. In 
short, the whole and principal business of your 
life must consist in continually quieting your 
heart, and never letting it go astray. 



CHAPTER II. 

flDf t\t Care toe jstiouTti Tjate to pre^erbe a Jpeaccfu 
%pirit. 

THEREFORE, above all things, you must 
be careful to place this sentinel of peace 
over all the movements of your heart; it will 
lead you to great things wirfiout any toil, even 
with great tranquillity and safety. And with 



7 



\ 



OF A PEACEFUL SPIRIT 273 

this sentinel, which God has given you, you will 
so watch over yourself, as to gain the habits 
of prayer, obedience, lowliness, and of bearing 
injuries without loss of composure. 

It is very tme, that before you can attain to 
this degree of peace, you will have to take great 
pains through want of practice, but afterwards 
your soul will abide in a state of great consola- 
tion, whatever contradiction may befall it ; and 
from day to day you will gain more and more 
the power of preserving a peaceful spirit. And, 
if sometimes you feel so disturbed and troubled 
as to be unable to pacify yourself, have recourse 
at once to prayer, and persevere in it, in imita- 
tion of Christ our Lord, Who prayed three times 
in the Garden, to give you an example, that 
prayer might be your only resource and refuge, 
and that, however sad and desponding you may 
feel, you must not leave off praying, until your 
will is conformed to the Will of God, and there- 
fore has become devout and calm, and also full 
of courage and fortitude, so that it can accept 
and embrace that which at first was an object of 
dread and abhorrence — going forth thus to greet 
it : — " Arise, let us be going ; behold, he is at 
hand which doth betray me/' 



/ 




274 OF INWARD PEACE 



CHAPTER III. 

J^oto t][)i0 '!3uiltjin5 of ^iuloartj peace must Ijc graDu* 
a{{p conj^rrucreU. 

BE careful, as I have before said, not to 
permit any thing to disturb your heart, and 
do not meddle with things which are likely to 
disquiet it, but labour ever to keep it in peace ; 
since in this way, the I^ord will build up within 
your soul a city of peace, and your heart shall 
be a house of pleasures and delights. This only 
He asks of you, that, when you feel agitated, 
you should begin again to quiet and calm your- 
self in all your actions and thoughts ; for as a city 
is not built in a day, so neither must you think 
that this inward peace is to be acquired in a day, 
because this is nothing less than to build a house 
for the Lord, and a tabernacle for the Most 
High, making yourself His temple. And the 
Lord for Whom it is built must Himself be the 
Builder of it, otherwise your labour will be lost. 
Also consider that the grace of humility must be 
the entire foundation and main support of this 
work. 



// 



\ 



HOW INTERIOR PEACE IS ACQUIRED 275 



CHAPTER IV. 

t)o)3) tf)c <S>oul mu0t refuse alt Connotations, for 
tlbi0 10 true Hpumilitp ant pobenp of Spirit, bp 
iuTjicl^ 3|ntcrfor peace 10 acquireu. 

IF you would enter by this gate of humility 
(for there is no other entrance), you must 
toil and make every effort, especially in the 
beginning, to embrace tribulation and adversity 
as your dear sisters — desiring to be despised by 
all, and to have no one who entertains a favour- 
able opinion of you, or brings you comfort, but 
your God. Fix deeply in your heart the im- 
pression, that God alone is your God, your only 
Refuge, and that all things else are thorns to 
you, which will wound you, if you press them to 
your heart. And if some affront is offered you, 
be very glad of it, and bear it with joy, being 
assured, that, because of it, God is with you ; 
and desire no other honour, and seek nothing 
else but to suffer for love of Him, and whatever 
may redound to His greater Glory. Strive to 
rejoice, when others use towards you injurious, 
reproachful, or contemptuous words ; for a great 
treasure lies hid under the dust, and if you 
willingly accept it, you will soon find yourself 
rich, though the one who has enriched you is 
unconscious of the benefit he has been the means 



276 HOW INTERIOR PEACE IS ACQUIRED 

of conferring upon you. Do not seek for the 
love or good opinion of any one in this life, that 
you may be left to suffer with Jesus Crucified, 
and have no one to hinder you. Be on your 
guard against yourself, as the greatest enemy you 
have. Do not follow your own will, your own 
disposition, your own judgment, if you would not 
destroy yourself. For this purpose you have need 
of arms to defend yourself from yourself; and 
when your will craves for anything — however 
right the thing may be — always place it first, de- 
tached and naked and with deep humility, before 
your Lord, beseeching Him that not your will 
but His may be done in it. And do this with 
desires wholly mortified, and without any admix- 
ture of self-love, knowing that you are nothing, 
and can do nothing of yourself. Beware of 
your own opinions, which bear with them an ap- 
pearance of sanctity and indiscreet zeal, against 
which the Lord cautions us : " Beware of false 
prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, 
but inwardly they are ravening wolves; by their 
fruits ye shall know them." Their fruits are the 
loss of inward peace and quietness. Everything 
which separates you from humility, peace, and in- 
ward tranquillity, in whatsoever dress or disguise 
it presents itself, is to you a felse prophet, one of 
those who in sheep's clothing, that is, under the 
pretext of zeal, and of lending some indiscreet 



// 



\ 



HOW INTERIOR PEACE IS ACQUIRED 277 

aid to your neighbour, are ravening wolves, 
which prey upon your humility and on the 
peace and quietness which are so necessary for 
all who seek real progress. And the greater the 
show of holiness in anything, the more narrowly 
should it be examined ; and this (as it has been 
before said) should be done in a spirit of repose 
and calmness. And if at times you should fail 
in something of this kind, be not disturbed, 
but humble yourself before your Lord, acknow- 
ledge your weakness, and learn a lesson for the 
future. Perhaps God has permitted you to fail, 
in order that He may bring down your pride, 
which is still lurking within you, and you are 
not aware of it If sometimes you feel your 
spirit pricked by some sharp and poisonous 
thorn, do not be disturbed because of it, but 
watch more diligently, lest it go further, and 
penetrate still more deeply. Withdraw your 
heart, and gently bring away your will into its 
abode of peace and quietness ; keep your soul 
purely for God, Whom you will ever find in your 
inmost parts and in the depth of your heart 
because of the uprightness of your intention. 
Be assured that everything happens in order to 
prove you ; and that in this way He may fit you 
for the good which is yours, and that you may 
be worthy of that crown of righteousness which 
by His Infinite Mercy is prepared for you. 




V 
278 OF iXWARD SOLITUDE 



CHAPTER V. 

t)oto tfjf %ouf s^oufB keep l^crscff in a srarr of 
iirtnarD %oIituDe, tl&ar ©on map toork Inrtbin brr 

SET, then, very high value on your soul, 
since the Father of fathers, and Lord of 
lords, has created it for His own abode and 
temple. Esteem it so highly, as never to suffer 
it to be degraded nor to incline to any other 
object Let your desires and your hopes be 
ever directed towards the coming of your Lord, 
Who will not visit your soul unless it remains 
in solitude. Do not suppose, that in the pre- 
sence of others He will open His lips, unless it 
be with words of reproach and abandonment 
He wills that the soul shall be alone, having put 
aside, as far as may be, its own thoughts, its 
own desires, and, what is much more to the 
purpose, its own will. Yet you ought not to 
impose penances indiscreetly on yourself, nor 
go in quest of opportunities of suffering for the 
love of God, simply under the guidance of your 
own will; but only with the advice of your 
spiritual father, and of those who are over you, 
and who, under God, have the rule over you, 
for He, using them as His instruments, disposes 
your will to do whatever He wills, and in the 
way that He wills. You are not to do your own 



\ 



OF INWA RD SOLITUDE 279 

will, but to let God do in you what He wills. 
Let your will be always so freed from self, as to 
have no desire of your own ; and if you have a 
desire concerning any thing, desire it only in 
such a manner as not to feel regret, if you should 
be thwarted in it, but that your peace of mind 
may remain as undisturbed as if you had en- 
tertained no wish in the matter. This is true 
liberty of spirit, not to bind one's self to any 
thing. If you yield up your soul to God in this 
state of detachment, unfettered and alone, you 
will see the wonders God will work in you. O 
wonderful solitude and secret chamber of the 
Most High, where only He will give audience, and 
speak to the inmost soul ! O desert, thus made 
a Paradise, since in it alone God vouchsafes to 
be seen, and to be conversed with ! " I will 
turn aside, and see this great sight." But if you 
would come hither, enter barefoot upon this 
ground, for it is holy. First, put off your shoes 
from your feet, that is, yoiir affections from 
your soul, and leave them bare and free ; carry 
neither purse nor scrip for this road; for you 
must desire nothing in this world, whatever 
others may seek; neither salute any one; fix 
all your thoughts and affections upon God alone, 
and not on creatures ; leave the dead to bury 
the dead ; you go your way to the land of the 
living, and let death have no part in you. 



// 




28o OF LOVE OF OUR NEIGHBOUR 



CHAPTER VI. 

®f t!)e prurience totjff!) tor ougftt to errrcicif in rftc 
ILobe of our /^eigt)tiour, !3o as not to Disturb i\\\^ 
j^eace. 

EXPERIENCE itself will show you, if you 
will make trial of it, that this path of 
charity and love towards God and our neighbour 
is the most clear and plain road leading to 
eternal life. The Lord said that He " came to 
send fire upon the earth," and that His only 
desire was " that it be kindled." But although 
the love of God has no bounds, that for our 
neighbour should have ; for, if it is not properly 
moderated, it might become a cause of great 
injury to you, and lead you, through gaining 
others, to be lost and ruined yourself 

You must love your neighbour only in such 
a way as not to hurt your own soul. Although 
you are bound to set a good example, yet you 
must not be actuated by that motive only, else 
you will lose all benefit to yourself Act in all 
things with simplicity and piety, without respect 
to any thing but to please God alone. Be 
humble in all you do, and you will realise what 
little benefit the example of such an one as you 
are, can be to others. Remember that your 



\ 



// 



OF LOVE OF OUR NEIGHBOUR 28 1 

zeal and fervour for souls must not be such as 
to destroy your own quiet and peace. Have a 
burning thirst and longing that all others may 
know the truth which you know and understand, 
and be inebriated with that wine which God to 
each one promises and gives without price. 

This thirst for the salvation of your neigh- 
bour you ought to have always ; but it should 
take its source from your love for God, and not 
from your own indiscreet zeal. God must plant 
it in your soul, separated from all others, and 
must gather the fruits of it when He wills. Sow 
nothing of yourself alone, but offer to God the 
ground of your soul, pure, and cleared of every 
thing : for then He will sow it with His own 
seed as He pleases, and so shall it yield fruit. 
Ever remember that God wills the soul to be 
alone, and detached from all, that He may unite 
it to Himself. Only allow Him to choose you, 
and do not hinder Him by your free-vi^ill. Sit 
without a thought of yourself, save that of pleas- 
ing God, waiting to be guided to what you 
have to do; for the Father of the house has 
already gone forth, and is seeking labourers. 
Lose all care and thought, strip off all anxiety 
about yourself, and all affection for earthly 
things, so that God may clothe you with Him- 
self, and give you what is beyond your power to 
conceive. Forget yourself entirely, as much as 



282 OF LOVE OF OUR NEIGHBOUR 

possible, and let the love of God alone live in 
your soul. Of all that has been said, let this 
abide with you, that with all diligence (or, to put 
it better, with all diligence save that which 
disquiets) you must calm your zeal and fervour 
with great moderation, that so you may keep 
God within you, with all peace and tranquillity, 
lest you lose the capital of your own soul, which 
is of the first importance, by indiscreetly 
putting it out to interest for the sake of others. 
A silence, preserved in the way we have said, 
is a strong cry in the ear of God ; inaction from 
this cause is that which alone you must traffic 
with, if you would be rich towards God, for this 
is nothing else but to resign your soul to God, 
detached from all things. And this you must 
do without taking any credit to yourself, or 
imagining that you are doing something; for 
God does all, and on your side the Lord wills 
only that you should humble yourself in His 
Sight, and offer to Him a soul, free, and wholly 
detached from earthly things, with the inward 
desire that His Divine Will may be most per- 
fectly, in all and through all, accomplished in 
you. 



Ji 



\ 



OF COMING BEFORE GOD 283 



CHAPTER VII. 

d^oto r!)f %out, tjeepotlcti of itg oiun CdtH, must pre* 
gent irscif before ^oD. 

YOU should begin, then, by degrees in this 
way, trusting sweetly in the same Lord 
Who calls you, saying : — ** Come unto Me, all ye 
that travail, and are heavy laden, and I will 
refresh you.*' * All ye that are athirst come to 
the Fountain/ This movement and Divine call 
you ought to follow, awaiting the inspiration 
with it of the Holy Spirit, that you may resolutely 
and blindly cast yourself into the sea of this 
Divine Providence and of the Eternal Good- 
Pleasure, praying that it may be done in you, 
and that thus you may be irresistibly borne on- 
ward on the mighty waves of the Divine Will to 
the haven of your own individual perfection and 
salvation. 

Having made this act, you should repeat it a 
himdred, a thousand times a day, labouring and 
endeavouring with all possible confidence to 
draw near, both inwardly and outwardly, with all 
the powers of your soul to those things which 
stir you up, and make you praise, love and trust 
God. And let these acts always be without 
force or violence to your heart ; for if they are 




284 OF COMING BEFORE GOD 

done with indiscreetness and eagerness, they 
may serve to weaken, and perhaps to harden 
you, and to render you incapable of them. Take 
the advice of those who are experienced, and 
seek to make it a habit, always in desire, and 
as frequently as possible in act, to give yourself 
t6 the contemplation of God's Goodness, and of 
His constant and tender blessings, and to receive 
with humility the drops which from His ines- 
timable Goodness distil into your soul. Be on 
your guard against forcing yourself to shed tears 
or feel sensibly affected in your devotions, but 
be still, and with an interior solitude, wait until 
the Will of God be wrought in you ; and when 
He gives you the feeling of devotion, it will be 
sweet, and come without effort or constraint on 
your part, and then accept it with all gentleness 
and tranquillity, and, above all, with all lowliness. 

The key with which you can open the secrets 
of the spiritual treasury is, the knowledge how to 
deny yourself always and in all things ; and the 
same key fastens the door upon distaste and 
dryness of spirit, when it springs from our own 
fault ; for that dryness which God sends must 
be classed with the other treasures of the soul. 

Delight to remain with Mary at the feet of 
Christ, and to listen to the words of your Lord. 
Take care that your enemies (of whom you are 
yourself the chief) do not hinder this holy 



\ 



OF COMING BEFORE GOD 285 

silence. And when you seek God with your 
understanding, in order to find repose in Him, 
remember that you must not assign any limits to 
Him, or make any comparisons with your feeble 
and narrow imagination, for He is above all com- 
parisons, and is Infinite, and is found through all, 
and in all, and all things are in Him. You will 
find Him present within your own soul, when- 
ever you truly seek Him, that is to say, when 
you seek Him and not yourself; for His delights 
are to be with us, the children of men, to make 
us worthy of Him, since He has no need of us. 
When you meditate do not bind yourself to cer- 
tain points, so as never to depart from them, but 
wherever you find repose, there stop and taste 
the Lord, in whatever part of the way He shall 
be pleased to reveal Himself to you ; and though 
you have made a digression, you need have no 
scruples, for the whole end of these exercises is 
to taste the Lord, with the intention, indeed, 
not of making the enjoyment itself the principal 
end, but rather of becoming more and more 
touched with the beauty of His works, and so 
drawn to imitate Him as much as possible. 
And when you have found the end, you have 
no reason to be any longer anxious about the 
means which are arranged for the purpose of 
attaining it. One of the hindrances to true 
peace and tranquillity, is the anxiety and careful- 



7 



V 



286 OF COMING BEFORE GOD 

ness with which we approach such exercises, 
chaining the spirit, and dragging it this way or 
that, thus dictating to God as to the way we 
would be led, and forcing it to go on the path 
of our own devising; thinking more of doing 
our own will in this than the Will of our Lord, 
which is nothing else than to seek God by flying 
from God, and to desire to content Him without 
doing His Will. If you really desire to make 
way on this path, and to reach the desired end, 
you must have no other aim or desire but to 
find God ; and wherever He is pleased to 
manifest Himself to you, leave all else, and go 
no further as long as He wills to detain you, for- 
getting all things for the time, and reposing in 
your Lord. And when it pleases His Divine 
Majesty to retire and to manifest Himself no 
longer, then you may return to the path of your 
meditation, and seek Him by continuing it, 
having ever the same purpose and desire before 
you — to find by these means Him Whom you 
love; and having found Him, do as we have 
said, leave all else, with the consciousness that 
His desire is fulfilled. 

This advice demands your attentive con- 
sideration ; for many spiritual persons lose the 
fruits and the peace of their meditations by 
wearying themselves in them, imagining they 
have done nothing, unless every point has been 



7 



> 



OF OFFERING OURSELVES TO THE LORD 287 

used, and making the perfection of the medita- 
tion to consist in this mastership of the will, 
living and toiling after this, as one who labours 
at a task, without ever attaining that true repose 
and interior peace wherein the Lord truly 
abides and rests. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

©f i\t Jfaitf) toe ^ijoulD Ijatje in tlje ^ost t^tA-^ 
Sacrament of tl)e Eltar j antJ t)oUj lue 0]tioull» 
0fffr oiir^cfueis unto i\t ILorU. 

STRIVE daily, that faith in the most Holy 
Sacrament may increase and grow in your 
soul, and never cease to excite admiration and 
joy at so incomprehensible a Mystery, consi- 
dering how God manifests Himself under 
these mean and simple elements to make you 
more worthy; for "Blessed are they who see 
not and yet believe.'' Do not desire Him in 
this life ever to manifest Himself under any 
other form. Endeavour to inflame your will 
towards Him, and to become more and more 
ready ever to do His Will in all things. When 
you offer yourself to God in this Sacrament, 
you must be disposed and prepared to suffer, 
for love of Him, all torments, pains, and in- 
juries which may happen to you, and all sickness. 




288 OF SEEKING GOD ALONE 



distaste, and dryness of spirit in prayer or at j 



other times ; thinking that you have to endure j 
all this very often, and must take it in good 

part, and be careful never to be the cause of it | 

yourself; and all your delight must be to suflfer ! 

with your dear and loving Jesus, and out of love j 

to Him. Be not inconstant in what you com- i 

mence, wishing one thing one day, and another ' 

thing the next, but persevere and be steadfast ; j 

and be sure that, by using these means (yet i 

always making efforts with the gentleness we j 

have described), it is impossible but that you ! 

should endure even to the end; for without | 

this peace you cannot live even an hour, for it | 

would be an intolerable suffering to you. j 



CHAPTER IX. 

tlTljat toe ougldt not to 0eefe piea^ure^, nor t^e 
tfjingfi talbtcl) gratify our tlTagtP^ ; \i\\t i0oB 
arone. 

ALWAYS choose toil, and love to be without 
the consolations of particular friendships 
and favours, which do not bring any profit with 
them to the soul ; and rejoice to be ever subject 
to, and dependent on the will of others. 

Let every thing be a means of leading you to 



I 



// 



\ 



OF SEEKING GOD ALONE 



289 



God, and let nothing detain you on the way. 
This should be your consolation, that every 
thing is bitter to you, and God your only re- 
pose. Let all your labours be directed to your 
Lord ; love Him, and give to Him your whole 
heart without fear ; for He will find a good way 
to solve all your doubts, and will restore you 
when you fall. Lastly, in one word, if you will 
love Him, you shall possess all good. Offer 
yourself to God for a sacrifice, in peace and 
quietness of spirit. And the better to advance 
in this journey, and to bear yourself up without 
weariness and vexation, you should at every step 
dispose your soul, by expanding your will to the 
extent of the Divine Will. The more your 
will is thus expanded, the more you will receive. 
Your will must be thus disposed, to will or not 
to will in every case, according as God wills or 
does not will it. Always at every step renew 
your purpose of pleasing God, and do not deter- 
mine upon what course you will pursue, except 
for the passing moment, but for the future keep 
yourself free. No one, however, is forbidden to 
exercise a proper prudence and diligence in pro- 
viding for necessaries, according to his position. 
For this is according to the Will of God, and is 
no impediment to peace or genuine spiritual 
progress. Let your purpose be in all things to 
do your duty according to your ability, and be 



X 



290 OF NOT BEING DISCOURAGED 

indifferent and resigned as to all results, which 
are beyond you. 

There is one thing always in your power, and 
that is to offer to God your will, and desire no 
longer to will any thing of yourself; for as soon 
as you have this freedom, and are detached on 
all sides (which you can be always and every- 
where, when occupied or not), you will enjoy 
tranquillity and peace. In this freedom of spirit 
consists the great good which you have in view. 
This freedom is nothing else than the persever- 
ance of the interior man within himself, without 
going forth to will, desire, or seek any thing out 
of himself; and all the time you abide in this 
state of liberty, you will rejoice in that divine 
servitude, which is the great kingdom that is 
within us. 



CHAPTER X. 

tSTbat Hje ^erljant of <5oU muiBt not be Di0courag:cl), 
rijougl) Ijc fed Ujitljin t)nn0clf letomc lRcpuii:nancc 
ann '£)i^^\mt a0 to tlbi^ peace. 

EXPECT often to feel disturbed, and de- 
prived of this holy and sweet solitude, 
and precious liberty ; for from the emotions of 
your heart, a cloud of dust will sometimes arise, 
which will give you much trouble on the road 



// 



\ 



// 



OF NO T BEING DISCO U RAGED 2 9 1 

you have to go. God permits this for your 
greater good. Remember that this is the war 
in which the Saints have carried off crowns of 
great merit. In all the things which disturb 
you, say — " Behold, Lord, Thy servant ; let Thy 
Will be done in me. I know and confess that 
the truth of Thy Word shall stand fast for ever; 
and Thy promises are sure, and in them do I 
trust. Behold Thy creature ; do with me what 
Thou wilt. I have nothing, my God, that holds 
me back. I am Thine alone." 

Happy is the soul which thus offers itself to 
its Lord, every time it is troubled and disturbed. 
And if the struggle last long, and you cannot 
as quickly as you would wish bring your will 
into conformity with the Will of God, be not 
on this account discouraged or bewildered : 
persevere in self-oblation and prayer, and you 
shall gain the victory. 

Look at Christ's conflict in the Garden, and 
how His Humanity recoiled from it, saying, 
" Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from 
Me." But at once He placed His soul in soli- 
tude, and with a will free and detached, said 
with deep humility, — "Nevertheless, not My 
will, but Thine be done." * See and act accord- 
ing to this pattern.' Do not move a step, when 
you find yourself in any difficulty, until you have 
raised your eyes to Christ on the Cross ; for 



^ 



292 OF THE DEVICES OF THE DEVIL 

there you will see written and stamped in large 
characters, how you ought to act. Copy faithfully 
this Example. Be not dismayed, if sometimes 
your own love of self disturbs you ; do not leave 
the cross, but return to prayer, and persevere 
in lowliness till you have lost your own will, and 
will only that God's Will may be done in you. 
And if, when you leave off praying, you have 
gathered only this one fruit, be contented ; but 
if you have not achieved this, your soul will 
remain empty and hungry. Strive not to brood 
over any thing, even for a short time, l)ut to let 
God Alone dwell in your heart. 

Do not harbour a feeling of gall or bitterness 
towards any thing or person, and do not let 
your eyes rest on the malice and bad example of 
others, but be like a little child, who has no 
consciousness of these bitter feelings, and passes 
through the midst of them offenceless. 



CHAPTER XI. 

flDf tTjc Diligence toldfcld t|)c Debit emplopjj to DijJturt 
t^t0 peace, ann l^oto toe o\x%\t to %\X9XW oat« 
igelt)e0 ag^atnjEtt \\^ 'DtX^itz^, 

AS it is our adversary's custom to seek to 
devour souls, he uses every possible 
means to lead us to forsake humility and sim- 



OF THE DEVICES OF THE DEVIL 293 

plicity, and to make us attribute something to 
ourselves, to our own industry and efforts, irre- 
spective of the grace which is given to us, with- 
out which no one can name the Name of Jesus, 

And though of ourselves by the exercise of 
our free-will, we can resist this grace, we cannot 
even receive it without its assistance. Thus, if 
any man does not receive grace, it is his own 
fault ; but if he does receive it, he can only do 
so through the same grace — 2, grace, however, 
which is sufficiently bestowed upon all. Our 
adversary, then, would make us think and 
believe that of ourselves we are more diligent 
than others, and that we are better disposed for 
receiving the gifts of God, and in this way would 
lead us to pride, and make us forgetful of our 
own insufficiency, when unaided, and then would 
induce us to despise others in our hearts, who 
do not the same good works that we do. 

Therefore, unless you are very watchful, and 
instantly turn with all promptness to humble, 
abase, and annihilate self (as has been said), he 
will make you fall into pride, like the Pharisee 
of whom you read in the Gospel, who gloried in 
his own good deeds, and condemned the deeds 
of others. And if in this manner he should ever 
get possession of your will, he will make himself 
master of it, and put into it all kinds of vices, to 
your, great hurt and peril. And therefore the? 



X 



^94 OF THE DEVICES OF THE DEVIL 

Lord warns us to watch and pray. It is indis- 
pensable, then, that you should use the utmost 
vigilance, in order to prevent the enemy from 
robbing you of so great a treasure as peace and 
quietness of mind ; for with all his might he tries 
to deprive you of this repose, and to make you 
live in continual unrest, knowing that such a 
state is fraught with danger and injury to your 
soul : for if a soul is at peace, all things are done 
with ease, and great things are done well ; hence 
it willingly perseveres and surmounts all opposi- 
tion with ease. And on the other hand, if it is 
disturbed and unquiet, it does but little, and that 
little very imperfectly, and soon becomes weary, 
and, in fact, lives in a fruitless martyrdom. If 
you wish, then, to come off victorious, and to foil i 
the enemy, when he attempts to destroy your I 
labours, there is nothing about which you must j 
be more on your guard than not to let your soul | 
become disturbed, nor to consent even for a 
moment to any temptation to disquietude. 

And that you may know the better how to 
guard yourself against the wiles of the enemy, 
make it a certain rule in this case, that every i 
thought which discourages you and lessens your 
love and confidence towards God, is a messenger i 
from hell, and therefore to be driven away, and 
banished from your presence without an audi- 
ence. For the office of the Holy Spirit is none 



// 



\ 



OF THE DEVICES OF THE DEVIL 295 

Other than always to unite the soul on all oppor- 
tunities more and more closely with God, enkind- 
ling and inflaming it with His sweet love, and 
with fresh confidence in Him ; whilst the work 
of the devil ever points in the opposite direction, 
and consists in the employment of all means in his 
power, such as, inordinate fear, exaggeration of 
our natural weakness ; scruples as to the dispo- 
sitions for Confession, Communion, or prayer, so 
that by these suggestions he may render us 
distrustful, fearful, and restless. The absence of 
warm feelings in our devotions, of delight in our 
prayers and other exercises, he uses as an oppor- 
tunity for producing impatient sadness, constru- 
ing it into a sign that all is lost, and into a reason 
for discontinuing our spiritual exercises ; and 
finally into a ground for despair, so that, do what 
we will, we think it will be in vain and fruitless. 
Thus sadness and fear go on increasing, till we 
imagine that we are forgotten by God. But 
this is not the truth ; for innumerable benefits 
are derived from dryness and the absence of 
devotional feelings, if only we understood what 
God by these means would work in us, provided 
we on our part would exercise patience and 
persevere in well-doing to the best of our power. 
And that I may make this more clear to you, and 
that the great advantages which God wills to 
bestow upon you may not, through your want of 



// 






296 OP INWARD PEACE 

precepdon, tend to joor hurt, I will briefly state 
what are the blessings of homble perseverance 
in these dry devotions, that, bearing these in 
mind, you may not lose your peace, when you 
suffer from this dryness of spirit and oppression 
of heart in consequence of lack of sweetness 
and consolation in devotion, or of any other 
temptation, however horrible it may be. 



CHAPTER XII. 

^at rOc %oul ougftt not to Disquiet itecif on account 
of intDaru Criat0, 

MANY blessings come to the soul through 
bitterness and dryness of spirit, when 
it is received with humility and patience. If we 
understood this, doubtless when we were visited 
in this way, we should be less disturbed and 
afflicted by it ; because we should not regard it 
as a token of our Lord's hatred, but rather of 
His great and special love, and we should receive 
it as a signal grace which He conferred upon us. 
This is very evident, from the fact that no one 
experiences these trials except those persons 
who desire to give themselves in a more especial 
way to the service of God, and to keep far from 
every thing which may offend Him ; and to such 
persons, these trials do not commonly happen in 



// 



\ 



OF INWARD PEA CE 297 

the beginning of their conversion, but after they 
have for some time served the Lord, and when 
they are forming resolutions to serve Him more 
perfectly, and have already begun to do so. 

But we never find that sinners, and those who 
have given themselves to the things of the world, 
have to lament such trials ; whence it is clearly 
manifest that this is a precious food with which 
God feasts those whom He loves ; and although 
it may be insipid to our taste, yet it is a mar- 
vellous help, though at the time we are not 
conscious of it. For the soul finding itself in 
such a state of dr}''ness, and, in addition to that 
trial, having to endure temptations the very 
thought of which seems scandalous, is led by this 
means to such a fear and loathing of self, and 
to such a state of lowliness as God desires ; 
although, as it has been said, the soul not know- 
ing at the time this secret, abhorred and recoiled 
from this discipline, as one who is unwilling ever 
to be left without sweetness and consolation, 
and who, when these are absent, esteems all 
other exercises to be but loss of time and labour 
without profit. 



// 



\ 




CHAPTER XIII. 

CrOat ^fmptatione are 0cnt u6 bp (Sod fot our g:ooD. 

TO comprehend, then, more particularly, how 
it is that temptations are sent us by God 
for our good, we must consider, that man, 
because of the evil inclinations of corrupt nature, 
is proud, ambitious, conceited, and always thinks 
himself to be more than he is. This self-esteem 
is so dangerous to true spiritual progress, that 
the very scent of it is enough to hinder the 
attainment of perfection. Therefore our most 
faithful God, in that loving Providence which 
He exercises over each one, and especially over 
those who have truly given themselves up to 
His service, takes care to place us in positions 
where we may escape so great a danger ; so that 
we are as it were forced to come to a true 
knowledge of ourselves. 

He acted thus with the Apostle St Peter, 
permitting him to deny Him, that thus he might 
know himself, and no longer be self-confident ; 
and with the Apostle St. Paul, who, after he had 
been caught up to the third heaven, and had 
heard Divine secrets, was visited with a trouble- 
some temptation, to the end that, knowing his 
natural weakness, he might remain humble. 



// 



\ 



OF TEMPTATIONS 209 

glorying only in his infirmities; and that the 
greatness of the revelations which God made to 
him, should not lead him to presumption, as he 
himself says. 

God, then, moved by compassion for our 
misery and perverse inclinations, permits these 
temptations to come upon us, and sometimes to 
be very horrible, and to come under different 
forms, that we may humble ourselves and know 
ourselves, though they seem to us to be useless. 
It is in this way He manifests His Goodness 
and Wisdom in making things which seem to us 
most hurtful to be most helpful, in that through 
them webecomemore humble — which is the thing 
above all others our souls need. For it generally 
happens that the servant of God, who is thus 
tried by thoughts such as these, by indevotion 
and dryness of spirit, concludes that they arise 
from his own imperfections, and that there 
cannot be another soul so imperfect and so 
lukewarm as his own ; and he believes that such 
thoughts come only to those who are forsaken 
by God, and that he himself, therefore, deserves 
to be forsaken by Him. It follows, then, that he, 
who once thought himself to be something, is now 
brought, by this bitter medicine, sent him from 
God, to regard himself as the most depraved 
person in the world, and as one unworthy to be 
called a Christian; and he never would have 



// 




300 OF TEMPTATIONS 

arrived at this low opinion of himself, nor attained 
to such a depth of humility, had he not been 
sorely tried, and forced as it were to it by these 
extraordinary temptations. 

There is one favour which God confers on the 
soul in this life which has placed itself back and 
given itself up into His Hands, and that is, to 
give it whatever medicine He pleases, and to 
administer that which He in His perfect know- 
ledge sees the soul stands in need of for its health 
and well-being. 

Again, besides this fruit, which our souls gain 
from such trials as lack of devotion, there are 
many others ; thus, he who is so afflicted, is as 
it were constrained to have recourse to God, and 
to seek to do good works, as a remedy for his 
distress ; and in the same way, in order to free 
himself from such torture, he sets about examin- 
ing his heart, avoiding all sin, and every thing 
which seems to be imperfect, or which may in 
any way place him at a distance from God. And 
thus this trial, which in his judgment appeared 
to be so adverse and hurtful, served for a lash to 
make him run towards God with greater fervour, 
and keep away from every thing which he thinks 
is not in conformity with the Divine Will. And 
lastly, all these trials, and all the toil and travail 
the soul endures, whilst braving these temptations 
and withdrawals of spiritual delight, are but a 



.// 



\ 



OF TEMPTATIONS 3OI 

loving purgatory, if (as has been already said) 
they are borne with humility and patience ; and 
they will help us to win that crown in Heaven, 
which otherwise we could not obtain, the glory 
of which will be in proportion to the toil and 
pain through which it was gained. 

Hence we see how little ground there is for 
that discontent or that alarm which inexperienced 
persons entertain, who attribute this trial to the 
devil, or to their own sins and imperfections, 
when it comes to them from the Hand of God. 

Tokens of love they take as signs of hatred, 
and imagine that these Divine favours and caresses 
are blows which come from an enraged heart, 
and believe that all they do is lost and worthless, 
and that this loss is irremediable. Whereas did 
they but rightly believe, that not only was there 
no loss, but great gain, (if the soul properly used 
the opportunity, as it always has the power of 
doing,) and that all was an evidence of God's 
loving remembrance of us ; it would not be pos- 
sible for them to be disquieted or to lose peace, 
because they perceived tnc.iiselves to be troubled 
with many temptations and imaginations, and 
found themselves dry and indevout in prayer 
and other exercises. On the contrary, they 
would with fresh perseverance humble their souls 
in the sight of the Lord, purposing in all and 
through all to accomplish the Divine Will, in 



\ 



302 OP TEMPTATIOirS 

whatever manner the Lord may will to be serred 
hj them in this world ; using diligence to keep 
themselves peaceful and tranqnil, taking eveij 
thing from the Hand of their Heavenly Father, 
in Whose Hand alone is the cup from which thej 
have to drink. 

For whether the trouble and temptation arise 
from the devil, or from men, or on account of sins, 
or in whatever way, it is always God Who gives 
it to you, though it reaches you through various 
channels, as it pleases Him ; since it is only the 
evil of the pain which reaches you, and this is 
always ordered for your good. Though, however, 
the evil of the fault itself — for example, an act 
of injury or insult committed by your neighbour 
— is contrary to His Will, yet as far as you are 
concerned, He makes use of it for your benefit 
and salvation. Therefore, instead of giving way 
to sadness and discontent, you should give thanks 
with inward joy and gladness, doing every thing 
that lies in your power with perseverance and 
resolution, without losing time, and with that 
loss the many and great rewards, which God wills 
that you should gain by this opportunity which 
He presents to you. 



J 



\ 



OF FA ULTS AND INFIRMITIES 303 



CHAPTER XIV. 

£Df rfje IScmcup \o^\\k.\ Ujc ougfjr to uge, so Sjs not 
to fee DisjquieteU imDer iFaiilt0 anu 3liifirmitic0. 

IF sometimes you should fall into some sin or 
negligence in word or deed, such as dis- 
turbing yourself at any thing which happens to 
you, or murmuring, or listening to murmuring, or 
falling into some dispute or irritation, or curi- 
osity, or suspicion of others, or into any other fault, 
whether it be one or many falls ; in a certain way 
you ought not to be disturbed nor disheartened 
nor saddened at the thought of what has hap- 
pened, nor be confounded within yourself; at one 
time, believing that you will never be free from 
such infirmities ; at another, that your faults and 
irresolution are the cause of them \ or again, 
imagining that you are not walking in the spirit 
and way of the Lord ; and thus with a thousand 
other fears, pressing down your soul at every step 
with discontent and cowardice. Hence it follows, 
that you feel ashamed to present yourself before 
God, or you do so in a spirit of distrust, as though 
you had not preserved that faith in Him which 
is His due ; and, as a remedy, you waste time 
in pondering over these things, scrutinizing how 
much you harboured the thought, and whether 



// 



X 



304 OF FA UL TS AND INFIRMITIES 

you consented to it ; whether it was voluntary or 
not, or was at once put away. And, from taking 
the wrong road, the more you think of it, the less 
you are able to make up your mind about it, and 
the more your weariness and perplexity increase, 
and your anxiety to confess it ; and so you go to 
confession with a tedious fear, and, after having 
lost much time in making your confession, your 
spirit is even more uneasy than it was before it, 
for fear that you have not told all ; thus your 
life is one spent in bitterness and anxiety, with 
little fruit, and with the loss in a great measure 
of its reward. 

And all this comes from not knowing your 
own natural weakness, and the way the soul 
should treat with God. For after having fallen 
into all the faults we have enumerated, or into 
any others, we may more easily treat with God 
by a humble and loving conversion, than by the 
spirit of grief and discontent at the fault itself, 
in the case of the examination into venial and 
ordinary sins, to which alone I now allude. For 
it is only into such sins as these a soul is wont 
to fall, which lives in the manner I am now 
supposing ; and I am speaking only of those 
persons who lead a spiritual life, and are striving 
to advance in it, and are free from mortal sin. 
For those who live carelessly, and in mortal sin, 
and are always more or less offending God, have 



J 



\ 



OF FAULTS AND INFIRMITIES 305 

need of a different kind of exhortation ; and 
this medicine is not for them. For such persons 
should be troubled and ought to weep, and to 
make their examination and confession with 
much thought, lest through their own fault and 
indifference, they render the remedy which is 
necessary for their salvation unavailing. To 
return, then, to speak of the quiet and peace in 
which the servant of God should ever abide, I 
will go further and say, that this conversion 
must be understood to apply— in order that there 
might be entire trust in God — not only to slight 
and daily faults, but also to such as are greater 
and more grave than usual, if at any time the 
Lord should permit you to fall into such ; even 
though they may be many together, and are not 
merely the effects of weakness and frailty, but 
of wilfulness. For the contrition which only 
disturbed the soul and filled it with scruples, 
will never lead it to perfection, unless it is com- 
bined with this loving confidence in the Good- 
ness and Mercy of God. And this is more 
especially necessary in the case of persons, who 
not only seek to rise out of their miseries, but 
would also acquire a high degree of sanctity, and 
a great love for, and union with, God. Many 
spiritual persons, from not wishing to under- 
stand this aright, ever bear about with them a 
heart and a spirit, broken and distrustful, which 



// 




$o6 OF MAKISG PROGRESS 

hinders their spiritiial p rogres s and czpauatj for 
the higher giaces, which (me after anodier God 
has prepared for them. These often lead a soft 
of life which is very wretched, assess, and 
pitiable, because they will follow only their own 
imaginations, and will not embrace the true and 
wholesome doctrine which leads by the royal 
road to the high and solid virtues of the Chris- 
tian life, and to that peace which was left us 
by Christ Himself! 

Such persons, whenever they find themselves 
in some disquietude through doubts of con- 
science, should seek the counsel of their spiri- 
tual father, or of some one whom they think 
capable of giving them the advice they need, 
and should commit themselves to him, and rest 
entirely in his judgment. The conclusion of 
what we have to say concerning the disquietude 
which arises from failings, will be found in the 
following chapter. 



CHAPTER XV. 

Ij^oto rbf ftru!, toitTjout fo00 of '^i\nt, gljoufii rf* 
cober €a(mncj30, ant malke Ptog^rrcts. 

TAKE this rule, whenever you fall into a 
fault, be it great or small, though you 
may have committed the same four thousand 



T 



OF MAKING PROGRESS 



307 



// 



times in a day, and always voluntarily and with 
advertency ; never allow yourself to fall into a 
state of morose bitterness, and do not be 
disquieted, nor waste your time by scrutinis- 
ing yourself, but at once acknowledge what you 
have done, and, humbly regarding your own 
weakness, turn lovingly to your God, and say to 
Him with your lips, or with your mind onlyt 
" Lord, I have done this, being what I am, and 
nothing else could be expected from me save 
only these and similar faults ; and I should not 
have stopped where I did, had not Thy Good- 
ness lifted me up, and continued with me. I give 
Thee thanks for that from which Thou hast 
preserved me, and I grieve over that which I 
have done through not corresponding with Thy 
grace. Pardon me, and give me grace that I 
may never offend Thee any more; and may 
nothing ever separate me from Thee, Whom I 
desire ever to serve and to obey." Having done 
this, do not waste time in anxious thoughts, 
imagining that the Lord has not forgiven you, 
but in a spirit of faith and repose continue your 
exercises, as if you had not fallen at all \ and 
this you must do not only once, but a hundred 
times, if it is needed, and at every moment, and 
with the same confidence and repose the last 
time as the first; for in this way you will do 
great honour to the Goodness of God, Whom 




you are bound to conceive of as All-Gracious^ 
and Infinite in Pitifulness beyond all that you 
can imagine. 

Thus, nothing will come to disturb your 
progress, your perseverance and your onward 
course ; nor will you let time pass away vainly 
and fruitlessly. And, moreover, you may, by 
thus acting, even turn your sin and failing to 
account, rising from it with an intense act of 
acknowledgment of your misery, and of self- j 
abasement before God; accompanying it with 
an act of acknowledgment of His Mercy — loving 
and exalting it. And this very fall will enable 
you to rise higher than you were before you fell, 
through the help which God gives you, provided 
you make good use of it. If those who are of 
an anxious and restless temperament, would give 
heed to what has been here said, they would 
discover how great is their blindness in thus, to 
their own great hurt, losing time. And this 
warning should be carefully noted, for it is one 
of the keys which the soul has for unlocking 
great spiritual treasures, and thereby for becom- 
ing in a short time rich. 



MUIR AND PATBRSON, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH. 

T \ 



Ititarp of @ipitrttual (EOoriuei for 



RIVINGTONS 
LonTion, 2>);fotli, anD SambtiTiee 



^ 



// 



IT is hoped that the " Library of Spiritual 
Works for English Catholics," which will 
comprise translations, compilations, and other 
works, will meet a need which has long been 
felt. As the devotional life of the Church of 
England has increased, so the demand for 
spiritual treatises has become more and more 
urgent, and has arisen from all classes of society. 
This series of books, some well-known, some 
already oftentimes translated, and others, it may 
be, yet to be presented for the first time in an 
English dress, is intended to meet this want. 

The aim of the translators is twofold. First, 
to provide the reader with a fair rendering of 
the original as far as possible unmutilated. It 
has been a common complaint of late, that trans- 
lations have been marred by the absence of parts 
of the original, the exclusion of which a more in- 
telligent view of Catholic devotion in the present 
day has rendered unnecessary. In these editions 
these omissions have been to a great extent 
supplied; yet at the same time any term or 
expression which may come under the imputa- 
tion of being " un-English " has been reduced, 
as far as may be without destroying the thought, 
to its equivalent in Anglican phraseology and 
belief Secondly, to translate the original into 
ordinary English, and thus to avoid the anti- 
quated and stilted style of writing, which often 
makes books of this kind distasteful, or even 
sometimes unintelligible. 



7 



\Specimen page. ] 



OF COMMUNICATING ' 269 

For the love of Christ is never diminished, 
and the greatness of His propitiation can never 
be exhausted. 

Therefore you. ought always to dispose your- 
self for this by a new preparation of mind, and 
with attentive consideration to ponder the great 
mystery of Salvation. 

So great, so new, so sweet it ought to seem 
to you, each time when you celebrate or when 
you are present at the Holy Sacrifice, as if on 
that very day Christ first descended into the 
womb of the Virgin and was made man, or hung 
on the Cross, and suffered and died for the salva- 
tion of mankind. 



CHAPTER III. 

tlETjat it 10 prafttabre to Communicate often. 

I. T) EHOLD, I come to Thee, O Lord, that 
IJ through Thy gift I may receive a 
blessing, and that I may be gladdened at Thy 
Holy Feast, which Thou, O God, hast of Thy 
goodness prepared for the poor. 

Behold, in Thee is all that I can desire, or 
should desire; Thou art my Salvation, and 
Redemption, my Hope and Strength, my Hon- 
our and Glory. 

Rejoice, therefore, to-day the soul of Thy 



// 



\ 



In Small 8vo, Elegantly Printed with Red 
Borders on Extra Superfine Toned Paper, 
Cloth Extra, Red Edges, 

PRICE 5s. EACH. 

Of the Imitation of Christ. 

In Four Books. By Thomas 1 Kempis. 

\N<no ready. 

The Christian Year. 

By John KebLE. {Ncno ready. 

The Spiritual Combat. 

By Laurence ScUPOLI. [Nearly ready. 

The Devout Life. 

By S. Francis de Sales. {Nearly ready. 

Other Works are in Preparation. 

These Editions are prepared especially for 
THIS Series. 

RIVINGTONS 
Hontiont HDjcfortit anti CamBritioe 



// 



'' \ 



